MANY travellers in the Philippines will remain stranded for the weekend as hundreds of flights were cancelled and a dozen airports were closed in the wake of typhoon damage.

Across the Philippines, 12 airports had been closed by closed by 6pm (AEDT) as super typhoon Haiyan wreaked havoc.

Horror: Deaths in super typhoon Haiyan

The closures caused by the strongest storm to hit the earth this year include airports servicing the popular tourist island destinations of Palawan, Bohol and Boracay.

The 12 airports shut were Tacloban, Surigao, Kalibo, Roxas, Caticlan, Iloilo, Romblon, Legazpi, Masbate, Dumaguete, Busuanga (Coron), Bacolod.

More than 450 flights across the country had been cancelled by 3pm.

The Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines Operations and Rescue Coordination Center said Kalibo Airport would remain closed until Monday, while Roxas and Tacloban would be closed until Sunday.

However, flights to the Philippines from Australian airports were still taking off as scheduled today. Qantas and Jetstar flights QF19 and JQ672/JQ79 between Sydney and Manila departed as normal today, with the airlines saying they expected only slight delays as aircraft skirted the path of Typhoon Haiyan.

National carrier Philippine Airlines said all services between Australia and the Philippines were also expected to leave on schedule.

On the ground in the Philippines, the tourist resorts of Boracay and Bohol were among areas of the country that bunkered down as Typhoon Haiyan hit the centre and south of the country, with winds of 315km/h reported.

Australians with holiday bookings to the region were asked to contact their tour operators for the latest updates, while the official Australian Government advisory warned travellers already there to find shelter and carry their passports at all times or secure them in a safe, dry place.

Intrepid Travel, one of the Australian tour operators in the region, whose next tour is due to run from November 30, said the company was monitoring the situation.

Travellers in the region or intending to visit in the coming days should be prepared to alter their trip plans in the wake of the storm, an Intrepid spokeswoman said.

"Some may think about continuing with their travel plans but often this is not possible or safe due to road closures, blackouts and debris," she said.

"So think about making plans to come home."

- With staff writers

Follow: Updates about Philippines airports

Advice: DFAT advice at Smartraveller