Kim Kardashian eBays her old clothes to help Philippines typhoon victims... but donates just 10% of the proceeds to charity



The recent typhoon in The Philippines has claimed thousands of lives and left many struggling to access basic medical care.



And now, Kim Kardashian is bringing attention to their plight by launching an eBay sale of her clothes and accessories.



However, rather than donate the entire proceeds of the sale to non profit organisation International Medical Corps, the multi millionaire is only giving ten percent to the charity, according to the eBay posting.



Sale: Kim Kardashian, pictured at a charity dinner last month has put dozens of her personal clothing and accessories on sale on eBay with ten percent going to charity

Launching the sale on Thursday, the 33-year-old reality star tweeted a link to her personal website where she had written a personal letter.

'Hi guys, this is a very special auction because a portion of the proceeds of my eBay auction are going to International Medical Corps, a nonprofit organisation that provides critical health services on remote islands where families are struggling to access medical care and basic resources like food, clean drinking water and vital medications ,' she wrote.

Only ten percent: Multi-millionaire Kim Kardashian, pictured in a Stella McCartney dress in January 2013, is donating a small portion of the proceeds from her clothing sale to International Medical Corps



'The proceeds will go directly to the communities they’re serving in the Philippines and will help typhoon survivors get access to medical care and ultimately save lives.



'My prayers and thoughts are with those affected by the typhoon. Check out my eBay auction here and support those who need our help in the Philippines. Xo.'



Kim has a reported net worth of $40million.

Sale: The website states quite clearly the amount of money going to the charity

You could own this: Bidding has already began for some of Kim's 'favourite' items, including this L'Wren Scott outfit which she wore in Dubai in October 2011



Dress for success: Kim's listing features dozens of designer outfits



The sale lists dozens of items of 'Kim's favourite clothes and accessories' from high end designers including Marc Jacobs, Chanel, Dolce & Gabbana and Prada.



Many of the items are listed as European size 42 (US size 8/UK size 12).



There are also more affordable pieces from Kim Kourtney and Khloe's clothing line The Kardashian Kollection.

Some of the more distinctive pieces of clothing are accompanied by photographs of Kim posing in the outfits on red carpets and at events.



MailOnline reached out to Kim's representative for comment but have yet to receive a response.