On November 8, 2013. Typhoon Haiyan—known as Typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines—made landfall in the central Philippines, bringing strong winds and heavy rains that have resulted in flooding, landslides, and widespread damage.

HOW YOU CAN HELP The best way to help those affected by disasters is to make a cash donation to reputable relief and charitable organizations working in the disaster zone. For more information, contact the Center for International Disaster Information at www.cidi.org or 202-821-1999. Visit the following site for a list of organizations responding to Typhoon Haiyan: PhilippinesRelief.AdCouncil.org Learn More About How To Help

Disaster Response - Latest News

Tuesday, December 8, 2015

On Thursday, December 3rd, representatives from U.S. Embassy Manila’s United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Catholic Relief Services and Tacloban City gathered in the city’s Astrodome to mark the end of the 24-month Typhoon Haiyan Recovery Program, implemented by Catholic Relief Services (CRS).

Over the last two years, USAID and CRS have worked in partnership with local officials to help restore normalcy and provide shelter to 3,275 families in 24 of Tacloban’s coastal barangays. For those who lost their homes completely, the program provided new shelters and built up new communities for relocation. The residents of these new homes have been trained to expedite their recovery, engage in their new community and claim their right to a life of dignity.

Read More »

Monday, April 21, 2014

Humanitarian agencies continue to prioritize shelter and livelihoods programs as focus shifts from relief to recovery.

USAID/OFDA shelter and settlements advisor travels to the Philippines to monitor programs.

USAID/OFDA allocates an additional $1.6 million to partner Catholic Relief Services (CRS) to support protection, shelter and settlements, and water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) activities in typhoon-affected areas.

Read More »

Typhoon Haiyan/Yolanda News Archive

Fact Sheets:

USAID staff prepare to load relief supplies into a US navy Seahawk helicopter at Tacloban Airport on November 17, 2013. Mark Ralston, AFP

Blogs and Press Releases

USAID Assistant Administrator Nancy Lindborg visits a warehouse at Tacloban Task Force Logistics headquarters where volunteers sort emergency supplies provided by USAID and others for distribution to families in need. Russell Galeti, USAID

News Stories

12/05/2013: The Washington Post - Five myths about helping the Philippines

11/21/2013: The New York Times - Typhoon Reignites Debate Over How U.S. Supplies Food Aid

11/20/2013: US News and World Report - Aid Workers Settle In for Long Haul After Haiyan

11/18/2013: Brookings Up Front - Typhoon Yolanda/Haiyan Makes the Case for More Flexible Food Aid

11/17/2013: USA Today - Philippine president to camp in hard-hit Tacloban

11/17/2013: The Wall Street Journal - Basic Aid Begins to Reach Philippine Communities Hit by Typhoon Haiyan

11/17/2013: The Christian Science Monitor - Filipinos reach out to typhoon evacuees as US relief effort moves into high gear

11/15/2013: US Global Leadership Council Blog - Helping The Philippines Heal

Related Links