Story highlights A week after Typhoon Haiyan hit, a grim reality is setting in

"My children are decomposing," one woman says

U.N. official: Conditions are improving, but "more more is required"

Latest national death toll from the typhoon is 2,360, officials say

A mother mourns the deaths of children who slipped from her grasp. A father says he's contemplated suicide. A family prepares to rebuild.

A week after Typhoon Haiyan tore through the Philippines, the adrenaline-fueled response to the storm and its aftermath have faded from the streets of Tacloban. Now, the grim realities of daily life have taken its place.

Juvelyn Taniega is trying to keep busy. She's collected old dishes and is cleaning them up, crouching on the ground near the spot where her home once stood and the place where she last saw her husband and six children alive.

"My children are decomposing," she said.

Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Photos: Typhoon Haiyan – A man reconstructs his house in the bay of Tacloban, Leyte province, Philippines, on Wednesday, November 27, 2013. Typhoon Haiyan, one of the most powerful storms on record, hit the country's eastern seaboard on November 8, leaving a wide swath of destruction, including more than 5,000 deaths. Hide Caption 1 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Photos: Typhoon Haiyan – A man rests on his damaged house along the shore in Tacloban on Monday, November 25. Hide Caption 2 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Photos: Typhoon Haiyan – Road traffic moves past destroyed houses in Palo, Leyte province, on Sunday, November 24, weeks after typhoon Haiyan caused heavy damage to life and property in the Philippines. Hide Caption 3 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Hide Caption 4 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman rests inside the damaged Our Lady of Guadalupe shrine in Tacloban, Philippines, on Sunday, November 24. Hide Caption 5 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman looks over the devastated waterfront in Tacloban on November 24. Hide Caption 6 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Typhoon survivors walk down a road in Palo, Philppines, during a procession for typhoon victims on November 24. Hide Caption 7 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A vehicle lies in the water in Tacloban on Saturday, November 23. Hide Caption 8 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man searches through the debris in Tacloban on November 23. Hide Caption 9 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man scavenges piles of wood amid damaged container vessels on November 23 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 10 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Local people begin to help clear debris near the shoreline where several tankers ran aground on November 23 in Leyte. The death toll from the storm stands at more than 5,000, according to a government-run news agency. Hide Caption 11 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man clears debris from in front of his home near the shoreline on November 23 in Leyte. Hide Caption 12 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Groups of men clear debris near the shoreline on November 23 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 13 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors of Typhoon Haiyan inspect the damage to their houses in Tacloban, Philippines, on Friday, November 22. Hide Caption 14 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Filpinos clear rubble from a hard-hit area in Tacloban on November 22. Hide Caption 15 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – An airplane lands in Tacloban as Antonio Lacasa rebuilds his house on Thursday, November 21. Hide Caption 16 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People carry a coffin through an opening in the wall of a public cemetery for burial in Tacloban on November 21. Hide Caption 17 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A member of the Philippine air force drops relief goods for survivors in Tolosa on November 21. Hide Caption 18 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Children blow bubbles in a destroyed market in Tacloban on Wednesday, November 20. Hide Caption 19 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Workers clear mud and debris in Tacloban on November 20. Hide Caption 20 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A boy climbs across debris in Tacloban on November 20. Hide Caption 21 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People at the airport in Tacloban react to a blast of wind from an aircraft on November 20. Hide Caption 22 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man walks through water in the typhoon-ravaged city of Tacloban, Philippines, on November 20. Hide Caption 23 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man sleeps on Tuesday, November 19, on a tanker that ran aground during Typhoon Haiyan in Tacloban. Hide Caption 24 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Firemen unload bodies November 19 for forensic experts to register and bury in a mass grave outside of Tacloban. Hide Caption 25 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Firemen unload more victims outside of Tacloban on November 19. Hide Caption 26 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man fans the flames of a fire in Tanauan, Philippines, on November 19. Hide Caption 27 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors salvage wood next to stranded ships in Tacloban on November 19. Hide Caption 28 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Philippine military personnel carry an injured survivor to an evacuation flight at the Tacloban airport November 19. Hide Caption 29 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People in Tacloban march in the rain November 19 during a procession calling for courage and resilience among survivors. Hide Caption 30 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People play cards by candlelight Monday, November 18, in Tacloban. Hide Caption 31 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A U.S. Navy helicopter delivers relief goods to typhoon victims in Ormoc, Philippines, on November 18. Hide Caption 32 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Men take food back to their families in Leyte on November 18. Countries all over the world have pledged relief aid to those affected by the typhoon, but damage to airports and roads have made moving the aid very difficult. Hide Caption 33 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People are held back as the U.S. Navy delivers aid from a helicopter in San Jose, Philippines, on November 18. Hide Caption 34 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A helicopter flies over a call for help in Ormoc on November 18. Hide Caption 35 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man cleans up mud inside a church in the hard-hit city of Tacloban on November 18. Hide Caption 36 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A boy bathes November 18 at a Tacloban school turned into a temporary shelter. Hide Caption 37 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Hundreds of typhoon survivors are packed into a U.S. military airplane November 18 for evacuation from Tacloban's airport. Hide Caption 38 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Typhoon survivors run toward a passing U.S. Navy helicopter in San Jose on November 18. Hide Caption 39 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A boy holding a toy machine gun sits Sunday, November 17, on a ship that ran aground in Tacloban. Hide Caption 40 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People gather around a helicopter as it delivers relief supplies November 17 in Guiuan, Philippines. Hide Caption 41 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Filipinos board an HC-130 Hercules airplane as U.S. sailors carry relief supplies November 17 in Guiuan. Hide Caption 42 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors clean mannequins found among the debris in Tacloban on November 17. Hide Caption 43 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man leans against a statue of the Crucifixion before a Mass at Santo Nino Church in Tacloban on November 17. Hide Caption 44 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man carries a piece of wood from the debris in Tacloban on November 17. Hide Caption 45 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors wait in line in Tacloban for relief goods on November 17. Hide Caption 46 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man looks over the devastation from his damaged home in Tacloban on November 17. Hide Caption 47 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A trapped resident braves the dust created by a U.S. Navy helicopter taking off Saturday, November 16, on Manicani Island, Philippines. Hide Caption 48 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Corpses are collected and loaded on trucks to be taken to mass graves in Tacloban on November 16. Hide Caption 49 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A victim's corpse floats on a river in Tanauan on November 16. Hide Caption 50 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A pregnant survivor waits to give birth in a hospital November 16 in Tanauan. Hide Caption 51 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A dead dog lies in front of a house destroyed by the typhoon in Tanauan. Hide Caption 52 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man carries a bicycle as he walks through the ruins of a Tacloban building November 16. Hide Caption 53 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors of the typhoon stand in a Tanauan street partially blocked by debris November 16. Hide Caption 54 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – An elderly survivor walks past toppled cars outside a church in Tacloban on November 16. Hide Caption 55 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man in Tanauan cleans meat after slaughtering his only cow that survived the typhoon. Hide Caption 56 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors gather in Tacloban to await transport to a neighboring province on November 16. Hide Caption 57 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Men carry a coffin toward a Leyte cemetery on November 16. Hide Caption 58 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A survivor cooks dinner in front of his damaged home in Marabut, Philippines, on Friday, November 15. Hide Caption 59 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Toppled coconut trees dot a mountain in an area devastated by the typhoon in Leyte province. Hide Caption 60 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A typhoon survivor keeps her husband alive by manually pumping air into his lungs after his leg was amputated at a Tacloban hospital November 15. The hospital has been operating without power since the typhoon. Hide Caption 61 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A survivor reacts to the damage at a residential area in Tacloban on November 15. Hide Caption 62 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Typhoon victims are treated in the lobby of a Tacloban hospital on November 15. Hide Caption 63 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Philippine Army soldiers carry the body of a civilian in Tanauan on November 15. Hide Caption 64 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Residents wait to board a Singaporean cargo plane at the Tacloban airport on November 15. Many survivors have converged on the city's airport to wait for flights. Hide Caption 65 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Search and retrieval teams carry a body bag in Tacloban on November 15. Hide Caption 66 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Haiyan survivors carry food that a U.S. military helicopter dropped off in Guiuan on Thursday, November 14. Hide Caption 67 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Dozens of bodies are placed near Tacloban City Hall on November 14 as workers prepare a mass grave on the outskirts of the hard-hit city. Hide Caption 68 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A girl plays inside her house amid the devastation in Tacloban on November 14. Hide Caption 69 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A Filipino soldier hands out bread to survivors in Maraboth, Philippines, on November 14. Hide Caption 70 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A boy takes cover from rain while waiting for an evacuation flight from Tacloban's airport November 14. Hide Caption 71 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Workers arrange bodies at a mass burial site at a Tacloban cemetery November 14. Hide Caption 72 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – The weary wait for evacuation from Tacloban on November 14. Hide Caption 73 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A truck lies in the water in Hernani, Philippines, on November 14. Hide Caption 74 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Children play with fallen power lines near a damaged school in Guiuan on November 14. Hide Caption 75 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Teresa Mazeda hangs laundry in the ruins of her Tacloban home on Wednesday, November 13. Hide Caption 76 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Nina Duran searches for belongings at her family's destroyed house in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 77 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors walk through the ruins of their neighborhood outside Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 78 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man sits in front of his destroyed business November 13 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 79 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A family, desperate to charge their mobile phones to search for family and friends, tries to use a ceiling fan to generate electricity November 13 in the Philippine province of Cebu. Hide Caption 80 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – An injured man in Tacloban rests beneath a picture of Jesus Christ on November 13. Hide Caption 81 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man takes a shower amid the rubble in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 82 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A rescue team wades into Tacloban floodwater to retrieve a body on November 13. Hide Caption 83 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Residents take shelter in a Tacloban church on November 13. Hide Caption 84 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Residents make their way through a destroyed neighborhood in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 85 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A boy cycles past a coffin left on a street in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 86 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man looks at his destroyed home November 13 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 87 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Body bags are lined up in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 88 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors prepare to board a military plane November 13 at the Tacloban airport. Hide Caption 89 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Photos: Typhoon Haiyan – Men walk through smoke as they burn debris from a Tacloban church on November 16. Hide Caption 90 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – An aerial view of Tanuan shows signs pleading for help and food November 13. Hide Caption 91 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Soldiers help a woman after she collapsed November 13 while waiting in line to board a military plane at Tacloban's airport. Hide Caption 92 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors wait to be evacuated from Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 93 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – An injured survivor gets carried on a stretcher before being airlifted from Tacloban's airport November 13. Hide Caption 94 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A survivor begins to rebuild his house in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 95 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Evacuees wait to board a military aircraft in Leyte on Tuesday, November 12. Hide Caption 96 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People walk through damage in Tacloban on November 12. Hide Caption 97 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A young man waits at the airport November 12 in hopes of being evacuated from Tacloban. Hide Caption 98 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman comforts a crying relative as a plane leaves the Tacloban airport November 12. Hide Caption 99 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A man sits crying on a packed aircraft in Tacloban on November 12. Hide Caption 100 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Debris lays scattered around a damaged home near the Tacloban airport on November 12. Hide Caption 101 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A girl sits inside a bus as she waits for a ferry in Matnog, Philippines, on November 12. Hide Caption 102 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Police line up bodies for processing in Tacloban on November 12. Hide Caption 103 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People in Tacloban pass debris on November 11. Hide Caption 104 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Survivors in Tacloban board a military plane bound for the Philippine capital of Manila on November 11. Hide Caption 105 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Residents carry bags of rice from a Tacloban warehouse that they stormed November 11 because of a food shortage. Hide Caption 106 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman in Tacloban walks amid the debris of destroyed houses on November 11. Hide Caption 107 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People make their way across a flooded street in Shangsi, China, on November 11. Haiyan moved toward Vietnam and south China after devastating the Philippines. Hide Caption 108 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Buildings lie in ruins on Eastern Samar's Victory Island. Hide Caption 109 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Emily Ortega rests on November 11 after giving birth to Bea Joy at an improvised clinic at the Tacloban airport. Hide Caption 110 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – U.S. Marine Corps Osprey aircraft arrive at Manila's Villamor Airbase to deliver humanitarian aid on November 11. Hide Caption 111 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People ride past destruction in Tacloban on Sunday, November 10. Hide Caption 112 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A body lies amid the Tacloban devastation on November 10. Hide Caption 113 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People cover their noses to block the smell of bodies in Tacloban on November 10. Hide Caption 114 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Bodies of victims lie along a Tacloban road on November 10. Hide Caption 115 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A large boat sits aground, surrounded by debris in Tacloban on November 10. Hide Caption 116 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People walk past the Tacloban devastation on November 10. Hide Caption 117 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People stand under a shelter in Tacloban. Hide Caption 118 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A girl peeks out from a makeshift shelter in Tacloban. Hide Caption 119 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Typhoon survivors wait to receive relief goods at the Tacloban airport on November 10. Hide Caption 120 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman mourns in front of her husband's dead body November 10 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 121 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Fallen trees litter the ground at the Tacloban airport on Saturday, November 9. Hide Caption 122 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A resident passes victims' bodies on a Tacloban street November 9. Hide Caption 123 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People in Tacloban carry a victim of the typhoon November 9. Hide Caption 124 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A vehicle lies amid Tacloban debris on November 9. Hide Caption 125 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – People walk past a victim left on the side of a road in Tacloban. Hide Caption 126 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A resident passes an overturned car in Tacloban on November 9. Hide Caption 127 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Rescue workers carry a woman about to give birth November 9 at a makeshift medical center at the Tacloban airport. Hide Caption 128 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – An airport lies in ruins in Tacloban. Hide Caption 129 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Astronaut Karen L. Nyberg took a picture of the typhoon from the International Space Station on November 9. Hide Caption 130 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Women walk past fallen trees and destroyed houses in Tacloban on November 9. Residents scoured supermarkets for water and food as they slowly emerged on streets littered with debris. Hide Caption 131 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A soldier pulls a cable inside the devastated airport tower in Tacloban. Hide Caption 132 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Tacloban houses are destroyed by the strong winds caused by the typhoon. Hide Caption 133 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Dark clouds brought by Haiyan loom over Manila skyscrapers on November 8. Hide Caption 134 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman carries a baby across a river November 8 at a coastal village in Las Pinas, Philippines. Hide Caption 135 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A resident walks along a fishing village in Bacoor, Philippines, on November 8. Hide Caption 136 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A house in Legazpi, Philippines, is engulfed by storm surge November 8. Hide Caption 137 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A child wraps himself in a blanket inside a makeshift house along a Bacoor fishing village. Hide Caption 138 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A woman and her children head for an evacuation center November 8 amid strong winds in Cebu City, Philippines. Hide Caption 139 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Huge waves from Haiyan hit the shoreline in Legazpi on November 8. Hide Caption 140 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A fisherman lifts a post to reinforce his home at a coastal village in Las Pinas on November 8. Hide Caption 141 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – A resident unloads nets off a fishing boat in Bacoor on November 8. Hide Caption 142 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Residents reinforce their homes in Las Pinas on November 8. Hide Caption 143 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – The storm approaches the Philippines in this satellite image taken Thursday, November 7, by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Hide Caption 144 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Workers bring down a billboard in Makati, Philippines, on November 7 before Haiyan makes landfall. Hide Caption 145 of 146 Photos: Photos: Typhoon Haiyan Typhoon Haiyan – Philippine Coast Guard personnel stand in formation beside newly acquired rubber boats after a blessing ceremony in Manila on Wednesday, November 6. The boats were to be deployed to the central Philippines in preparation for Haiyan. Hide Caption 146 of 146

Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A mother carries her baby through the debris of destroyed houses in Tacloban, Leyte province, Philippines on Wednesday, November 27, 2013 Typhoon Haiyan, one of the strongest storms in recorded history, has devastated parts of the Philippines and killed thousands of people. Hide Caption 1 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A child stands on a wooden cart among destroyed houses in Tacloban on Tuesday, November 26. Hide Caption 2 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children salvage reusable items in a waterfront community in Tacloban, Philippines, on November 23. Hide Caption 3 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A boy peers out of a damaged structure near the shoreline on November 23, 2013 in Tacloban, Philippines. Hide Caption 4 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A young boy cleans salvaged toys near a ship that was washed ashore by Super Typhoon Haiyan in this Tacloban, Philippines, on November 23, 2013. Hide Caption 5 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children walk through debris near the shoreline where several tankers ran aground on November 23, in Leyte, Philippines. Hide Caption 6 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A typhoon survivor kisses her baby as she waits to board her evacuation flight at the airport in Tacloban on Friday, November 22. Hide Caption 7 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Emergency nurse Vanesa Carbajal, who is part of the medical team for the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation and Development, positions a newborn for treatment for respiratory problems at the Eastern Visayas Medical Center in Tacloban on November 22. Foreign aid has poured into the Philippines since the super typhoon hit. Hide Caption 8 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A young Filipino takes a shower on the side of a road in Tacloban, on Thursday, November 21. Hide Caption 9 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children blow bubbles in the destroyed market of Tacloban, Philippines, on Wednesday, November 20. Hide Caption 10 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Premature babies sleep November 20 at the Eastern Visayas Medical Center in Tacloban. Hide Caption 11 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A child sleeps in a hallway outside the overcrowded children's and maternity ward at the Eastern Visayas Medical Center on November 20. Hide Caption 12 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A family rests Tuesday, November 19, in the hull of a tanker run aground during Typhoon Haiyan in Tacloban. Hide Caption 13 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A boy sits on a car amid the debris in Leyte, Philippines, on Monday, November 18. Hide Caption 14 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Survivors wait for an evacuation flight at the Tacloban airport on Sunday, November 17. Hide Caption 15 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman reaches out to her 1-day-old granddaughter at a Tacloban hospital on November 17. Hide Caption 16 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Young girls stare at the full moon outside a makeshift shelter in Tacloban on Saturday, November 16. Hide Caption 17 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Two Filipino children cry as their mother, using a refrigerator as a boat, tries to move the family to a neighboring island near Tacloban on November 16. Aid workers would not let the woman and her children travel this way. Hide Caption 18 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman comforts her child while sitting in line at the Tacloban airport on November 16. Hide Caption 19 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A young girl walks amid ruins of houses in a neighborhood badly affected by the typhoon in Guiuan, Philippines, on Friday, November 15. Hide Caption 20 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Choir boys carry hymnals November 15 during a Mass for typhoon victims at Westminster Cathedral in London. Hide Caption 21 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman and her newborn baby lie on the floor of a Tacloban hospital on November 15. Hide Caption 22 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children gather at the Tacloban airport on November 15. Many survivors have converged on the city's airport to wait for flights out. Hide Caption 23 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman bathes a baby Thursday, November 14, at a church building where a number of survivors are taking shelter in Tacloban. Hide Caption 24 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A boy rides his bike past a coffin and other scenes of destruction Wednesday, November 13, in Tacloban. Hide Caption 25 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children carry relief goods as they pass by damaged houses in Tacloban on November 13. Hide Caption 26 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children in Tacloban wait for social workers November 13. Hide Caption 27 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Tacloban residents ask for water while waiting to get a free pass to board a U.S. plane Tuesday, November 12. Hide Caption 28 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Survivors seek medical attention at a makeshift hospital inside an airport compound November 13 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 29 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Residents take shelter in a church November 13 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 30 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman holding a baby runs during a downpour Tuesday, November 12, in Tacloban. Hide Caption 31 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A boy and a girl salvage materials November 12 in Leyte, Philippines. Many in the region have nothing left. Hide Caption 32 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Typhoon survivors line up November 12 in hopes of boarding a military transport plane out of Tacloban. Hide Caption 33 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman weeps as she carries a child to a military aircraft in Leyte on November 12. Hide Caption 34 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Philippine military personnel try to prioritize children and women first as people wait for evacuation flights November 12 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 35 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman carrying a child cries November 12 as survivors wait to board an aircraft in Tacloban. Hide Caption 36 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Survivors walk in Tacloban on November 12. Hide Caption 37 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman cries November 12 as other survivors wait to evacuate Tacloban. Hide Caption 38 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A Philippine air force officer hands out orange slices to typhoon survivors as they line up to board a military transport plane November 12 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 39 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children stand on rubble in the storm-ravaged town of Hernani, Philippines, on Monday, November 11. Hide Caption 40 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A young girl lays in bed awaiting treatment in a Tacloban hospital on November 15, in Leyte, Philippines. Hide Caption 41 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Newborn Bea Joy rests November 11 after her mother gave birth to her at the airport in Tacloban. Hide Caption 42 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A boy in Tacloban walks near a container appealing for help. Hide Caption 43 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Soldiers let a woman and her child through a fence to get food November 11 outside the Tacloban airport. Hide Caption 44 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A woman carries a child through a flooded street in Yong'an, China, on November 11. China and Vietnam were also hit hard by the storm. Hide Caption 45 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Residents of Anibong, Philippines, rest November 11 near a ship propeller that washed ashore during the storm. Hide Caption 46 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Survivors walk through the streets of Tacloban as a military plane flies overhead on November 11. Hide Caption 47 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A young survivor rests on a pedicab November 11 in Tacloban. Hide Caption 48 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children peek out from their makeshift shelter in Tacloban on Sunday, November 10. Hide Caption 49 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A young Tacloban resident walks inside a damaged home on November 10. Hide Caption 50 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Children carry relief goods past damaged homes in Tacloban on November 10. Hide Caption 51 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – Two young boys look at the devastation in Tacloban on November 10. Hide Caption 52 of 53 Photos: Photos: Children among typhoon victims Children among Typhoon Haiyan victims – A Vietnamese soldier assists a girl Saturday, November 9, as villagers are moved in the central province of Quang Nam. Hide Caption 53 of 53

JUST WATCHED Typhoon devastation beyond Tacloban Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Typhoon devastation beyond Tacloban 04:20

JUST WATCHED General Kennedy on typhoon relief Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH General Kennedy on typhoon relief 02:08

JUST WATCHED Clinic in Tacloban overflowing Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Clinic in Tacloban overflowing 02:10

In other parts of the storm-ravaged city, help has arrived. Trucks carry food. Crews clean up debris. Workers line up bodies to be identified by families who've been searching for their loved ones.

Humanitarian workers and military troops from around the world have converged on the Eastern Philippines, racing against time to rescue and feed those devastated by the storm.

The horror is everywhere thanks to what was Super Typhoon Haiyan when it came ashore a week ago ago, packing winds 3.5 times as strong as Hurricane Katrina, pushing in a wall of water 15 feet high and washing away towns on many islands.

The official nationwide death toll from the typhoon had increased to 2,360 by Friday morning. Other reports suggested the toll could be far higher, with thousands feared dead in Tacloban alone.

The deadly storm left more than 3,850 injured and at least 77 people reported missing across the Philippines, officials said.

Reaching all the victims and assisting the survivors -- including more than 2 million people in need of food, according to the Philippines government -- are both priorities now.

A significant sign of stepped up relief efforts was Thursday's arrival of the USS George Washington, an aircraft carrier teeming with 5,500 crew. It's accompanied by eight more ships that, together, have 80 aircraft -- including 21 helicopters -- that can deliver supplies to hard-to-reach areas and conduct search-and-rescue missions for those still holding on six days after the epic storm.

Supplies running out at hospitals

In Tacloban, the bloated corpses of dogs lie next to body bags filled with human remains. The stench from wreckage hovers all around, as people sift through debris. A line snakes around the airport, filled with those eager to leave. Families huddle inside the city convention center, savoring their first rice in a week but not knowing when their next meal will come.

"We really don't know what we're going to do next," said 30-year-old May May Gula, 30, a member of one of eight families sharing what was left of a room on the convention center's ground floor.

JUST WATCHED Typhoon survivors: Where is the help? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Typhoon survivors: Where is the help? 01:40

JUST WATCHED 'We miss our homes, have nothing to eat' Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH 'We miss our homes, have nothing to eat' 05:18

JUST WATCHED Special type of aid needed in Philippines Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Special type of aid needed in Philippines 01:57

JUST WATCHED Mayor of Tacloban's story of survival Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Mayor of Tacloban's story of survival 02:20

JUST WATCHED Storm survivors desperate for aid Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Storm survivors desperate for aid 05:11

Some typically called upon to help need help themselves.

Take First Seaman Ryan Cardenas, a member of the Philippines Navy, who has helped with recovery efforts after two other cyclones in the past two years that left hundreds dead.

But when Haiyan slammed into the Tacloban naval station where he's based, he and other sailors clung to rafters in their barracks. Their commanding officer, who was in a separate building almost demolished by the storm, stayed alive by clutching a palm tree's trunk.

Afterward, sailors helped retrieve some bodies, according to Cardenas. One found his mother sitting dead against a wall.

Now, they're sorting through the wreckage of the naval station and awaiting orders.

"This is the worst," Cardenas said, taking a break from fixing a piece of damaged furniture. "We're both victims and rescuers."

Senator concerned about crimes against women

In some cases, it's not that there's not enough food, water and other necessities. It's that they are not being given out, because getting to those in need is so difficult.

The danger of violence -- whether out of desperation or confusion -- looms over the relief efforts.

Police warned a CNN crew to turn back Wednesday on the road south of Tacloban, saying rebels had been shooting at civilians.

"Maybe they are looking for food," a police commander said.

U.S. Navy Rear Adm. Mark Montgomery, the commander of the USS George Washington's strike group, acknowledged security is an issue. But it's hardly the only one, nor even the biggest.

"Obviously, the conditions are pretty grim right now," Montgomery told CNN Thursday. "But it's not as much security as it is just the inaccessibility of the roads."

A Philippines senator said she's learned of reports of rapes and other crimes against women, some allegedly perpetrated by convicts who escaped prison in the typhoon's aftermath, the state-run Philippines News Agency reported.

Sen. Nancy Binay particularly expressed alarm after women said on TV that the situation had become worse, with assailants going so far as to break into people's homes.

Debris hampers delivery of aid

International aid has piled up at airports, blocked from distribution to the starving by miles of debris-strewn roads.

It is taking a long time to clear them and establish communications in to remote areas, said Philippines Secretary of the Interior Mar Roxas.

"Imagine a situation where from zero, from zero, no power, light, water, communication, nothing, you have to build the social infrastructures as well as the physical infrastructures for 275,000."

In the meantime, U.S. Marines have transformed a sleepy airbase in Cebu into a buzzing center of activity that included cargo aircraft, tilt-rotor Ospreys and camouflaged Marines. The Ospreys can land in remote spots where there are no cleared runways, but crews still find themselves hemmed in by debris.

"Some of those neighborhoods are inundated with water, and some of it's inaccessible," Brig. Gen. Paul Kennedy said.

Roxas would love to see the assistance getting out faster. Still, he feels it's doubling by the day.

Amos, the top U.N. humanitarian official, pointed Thursday morning to a continuing litany of needs -- such as clean water, hygiene kits, hospital supplies, tents and other shelters.

The airport can handle more traffic, and roads are getting better and better. At the same time, Amos said, "We know that much more is required."

'Immense' need

But can it come soon enough? That's a pressing question in Guiuan, a remote community of about 45,000 people that was among the first areas hit by the full force of the storm.

Alexis Moens, a team leader with Doctors Without Borders, described whole areas as "flattened -- houses, medical facilities, rice fields, fishing boats, all destroyed."

"People are living out in the open; there are no roofs left standing in the whole of Guiuan," Moens said. "The needs are immense, and there are a lot of surrounding villages that are not yet covered by any aid organizations."

In Tacloban, those who survived say they have no choice but to move forward.

Jericho, a boy whose mother, aunt and nine cousins were killed in the storm, tells his father he wants to leave the city on one of the planes he's seen flying overhead. His father tells him they have to stay in Tacloban.

"We have no money," he says. "Just each other."

A man whose wife and child died said he can't stop thinking of seeing his family drown in the storm.

"The first one that I saw was my youngest," he said. "She fainted, and then she drowned. The water was so fast. And then my wife, when I tried to grab her, I missed her. Then she drowned, and then I never saw her again."

Over the past week, he admits he's often thought of killing himself.

But he hasn't, he said, because he still has one child who needs him.