Palau assesses damage after Super Typhoon Haiyan

Updated

Sorry, this video has expired Video: Super Typhoon Haiyan devastates parts of Palau (ABC News)

Emergency crews have been sent to Kayangel, the northernmost state of Palau, to assess the damage after a super typhoon struck overnight.

Super Typhoon Haiyan pounded Palau and parts of Micronesia early Thursday morning, packing winds of up to 250 kilometres per hour.

Kayangel is located 24 kilometres away from Palau's capital, Koror, and was in the eye of the typhoon.

A helicopter pilot who flew to Kayangel on Thursday afternoon reported the island had received major damage to structures and trees, the Palau National Emergency Committee (NEC) said.

Earlier local journalist Bernadette Carreron told Radio Australia's Pacific Beat most of the people living on Kayangel had ignored a mandatory evacuation order ahead of the storm.

The NEC says all 69 residents on the island have now been accounted for and had no significant injuries.

"Another helicopter has been dispatched to provide any needed medical treatment and to supply the people with food, water and shelter until they can be evacuated," it added in a statement.

The government says assessments are ongoing, with the Bureau of Public Health reporting no fatalities from the storm.

However, it says many homes have been destroyed or damaged, especially in the northern states and the populated districts of Koror.

Koror, Babeldaob and Kayangel is without power and some areas are without water.

'We were very prepared for this one'

The typhoon is now to the north of Palau and is tracking away from the islands towards the Philippines.

Carl MacEllroy, from the US National Weather Service in Guam, says the typhoon appears to have swept to the north of the more heavily populated islands of Micronesia.

"Unfortunately the small island of Kayangel, north of Koror, experienced the eye," he said.

There have been reports of damage to the neighbouring Ngarchelong.

Jessy Ilele, from the Palau Pacific Resort in Koror, says they only experienced the edge of the storm, and damage appears to be minimal.

"At the moment, there's still some gusty winds," he said.

"There's some trees laying down and debris, but it's not really that bad. The typhoon didn't really actually hit us, it just passed by a little."

He says typhoons of this magnitude are rare, but locals have learned the lessons of past disasters.

"It's very rare, but we did have one last year - Typhoon Bopha," he said.

"That also didn't do much, but it was also a super typhoon, so we learned from that and we were very, very prepared for this one."

Topics: storm-disaster, storm-event, palau, micronesia-federated-states-of, pacific, philippines, asia

First posted