The compilation album includes songs by Beyonce, U2 and Adele and is available at iTunes.

Beyonce strikes a pose while performing in New Zealand. She's one of many artists donating a song to aid relief efforts in the Philippines. (Photo: Rob Hoffman, Invision for Parkwood Entertainment) Story Highlights The multi-genre, all-star album cuts across several major record labels

Proceeds benefit the Phillipine Red Cross

The digital collection includes 39 hits

Isn't it nice when everyone bands together for a cause? This time around, it's big-time artists and their labels, who are joining forces to raise money for the Philippine Red Cross in the aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan.

MORE: David Guetta raises money, awareness for Philippines

Record labels Sony, Warner Music and Universal have put together a genre-spanning compilation album called Songs for the Philippines. The album features 39 hit songs, such as Justin Timberlake's Mirrors, Katy Perry's Unconditionally and Beyonce's I Was Here. It also features classic tracks like The Beatles' Across the Universe, Bob Dylan's Shelter From the Storm and Madonna's Like A Prayer. The compilation album is available on iTunes ($9.99). All proceeds will be donated to the cause.

Here's the complete track list:

1. The Beatles, Across the Universe

2. Bob Dylan, Shelter From the Storm

3. Michael Bublé, Have I Told You Lately That I Love You

4. U2, In A Little While

5. Bruno Mars, Count On Me

6. Beyoncé, I Was Here

7. Eminem, Stan (live from BBC Radio 1)

8. Cher, Sirens

9. Adele, Make You Feel My Love

10. Katy Perry, Unconditionally (Johnson Somerset remix)

11. One Direction, Best Song Ever

12. fun., Carry On

13. Lady Gaga, Born This Way (the Country Road version)

14. Justin Timberlake, Mirrors

15. Justin Bieber, I Would

16. Alicia Keys, New Day

17. Imagine Dragons, 30 Lives

18. Madonna, Like A Prayer

19. Pink, Sober

20. Kylie Minogue, I Believe In You

21. Enrique Iglesias, Hero

22. Red Hot Chili Peppers, Factory of Faith

23. Linkin Park, Roads Untraveled

24. Kings of Leon, Use Somebody

25. Muse, Explorers

26. Lorde, The Love Club

27. Josh Groban, Brave

28. Kelly Clarkson, Stronger

29. Paolo Nutini, Simple Things

30. Ellie Goulding, I Know You Care

31. James Blunt, Carry You Home

32. Pitbull featuring Christina Aguilera, Feel This Moment

33. Earth, Wind & Fire, Sign On

34. Apl.De.App, Going Out featuring Damian Leroy

35. Sara Bareilles, Brave

36. Jessica Sanchez, Lead Me Home

37. Lily Allen, Smile

38. The Fray, Love Don't Die

39. The Beatles, Let It Be

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1cmXA3d