Denmark increases its support to the victims of the Typhoon Haiyan

Minister for Development Cooperation, Christian Friis Bach, has today in light of the UN assessment of the magnitude of the catastrophe and in light of the pressing need for urgent assistance, decided to increase the Danish contribution to the victims of the disaster from the 10 million Danish Kroner that were announced Saturday to 30 million Danish Kroner in all (about 5.5 million US Dollars) to the international organisations that provide humanitarian assistance to the Philippines. The total Danish contribution to the relief efforts in the Philippines thereby reaches 42.5 million Danish Kroner (7.8 million US dollars).

Minister for Development Cooperation, Christian Friis Bach, says:



- The disaster has hit much harder than we initially feared. More than 40.000 houses are destroyed, 11.3 million persons are affected by the catastrophe, and currently more than 670.000 people are displaced from their homes. There is a widespread need for food, clean drinking water and medical supplies, but also for power supply and means of communication. Assistance from the international community is urgently needed and I have, therefore, decided to increase significantly the Danish contribution to the relief efforts.

- The assistance to the World food Programme will contribute to their efforts to deliver food to 2.5 million people in need in spite of the many access- and communication challenges. The funds to UNICEF will contribute to their life-saving activities to ensure access to especially clean water, but also to sanitation, medical care and medicines. The assistance to the International Red Cross Federation will contribute to their efforts to provide shelter, food, clean water and medical supplies to around 100.000 Philippine families.

The Danish contribution of 30 million Danish Kroner is composed of 18 million kroner to the WFP, 6 million kroner to UNICEF and another 6 million kroner to the International Red Cross Federation (IFRC). In addition, Denmark has already contributed with another 5.7 million Danish Kroner through five Danish humanitarian organisations and 1.8 million Danish Kroner to the Danish Emergency Management Agency (DEMA), as well as 5 million kroner of the regular 100 million kroner Danish contribution to the UN Central Emergency Response Fund, which has today released 25 million USD (140 million DKK) to the UN appeal. The total Danish contribution to the relief efforts in the Philippines thereby reaches 42.5 million Danish Kroner (7.8 million US dollars).



This morning, the UN launched an emergency flash appeal of 301 million US Dollars (or 1.7 billion Danish kroner) for the response efforts in the Philippines until May 2014. According to the UN assessment, the most urgent needs are shelter, food, water and sanitation.

Background

By noon local time Tuesday, 1800 people had been confirmed dead in the wake of the typhoon. But losses and the magnitude of the destruction has not yet been assessed for several remote districts where loses are estimated to be large. Local authorities estimate that up to 10.000 people may have lost their lives in Tacloban alone.



Through 5 Danish humanitarian organisations, Danmark has financed aid projects for the victims of the typhoon to the amount of 5.7 million DKK. In addition, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has provided 1.8 million DKK to the Danish Emergency Management Agency (DEMA) for sending out a mobile coordination center to Tacloban including a camp complete with tents, electricity and water for 30 persons. UN personnel will use the center for coordinating the international assistance to the affected areas. Included in the assistance are 6 persons, who will manage the coordination center and the camp and assist the UN as the need arises.



For more information please contact: Frej Jackson på tlf. 29724477.

