Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption The BBC's Tulip Mazumdar reports from a school building which is home to survivors

The death toll from Typhoon Haiyan has risen above 5,000, officials in the Philippines say, two weeks after the devastating storm hit the country.

The country's National Disaster Agency says that 5,209 people are now known to have lost their lives, with many more still missing.

That makes Haiyan, known as Yolanda in the Philippines, the deadliest natural disaster in the country's history.

Floods in the Ormoc region in 1991 killed 5,101 people.

In the first week we can say we were in the emergency room - this second week we are now in the ICU, still critical but stabilised Eduardo del Rosario, National Disaster Council Emotional scars

Haiyan was one of the most powerful typhoons ever recorded.

Flattened

Winds of up to 270km/h hit the central Philippines when it made landfall on 8 November.

Parts of low-lying islands were completely flattened.

Eduardo del Rosario, executive director of the Philippines' National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council, said that more than four million people were displaced by the storm.

Over a million houses were damaged.

Many residents in the worst hit areas are still without proper shelter as they try to rebuild their homes.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Part of the recovery work is to clear roads so deliveries can get through

Image copyright Getty Images

Image copyright AFP Image caption Residents of Tacloban who have lost everything exist on food parcels

Many residents in the worst hit areas are still without proper shelter as they try to rebuild their homes.

Mr del Rosario told the Associated Press news agency he believed the worst was over.

"In the first week we can say we were in the emergency room," he told the agency.

"This second week we are now in the ICU [intensive care unit], still critical but stabilised."

He said he believed that the number of dead reported in the city of Tacloban was likely to go up.

The capital of Leyte province has reported 1,725 deaths.

More than 1,600 people are missing across the affected region.

Most of the dead had been buried in mass graves, and many bodies were unidentified, Mr del Rosario said.