Danish support to the Filipino victims of Typhoon Haiyan

Last Friday, one of the strongest typhoons ever ravaged the Philippines, affecting the lives of 4.3 million people. As an initial rapid response, Denmark has allocated DKK 10 million for emergency aid in the hardest hit areas.

Last Friday, one of the strongest typhoons ever ravaged the Philippines, affecting the lives of 4.3 million people. According to very preliminary reports from local authorities, approximately 10,000 people died in the central Philippines as a result of the storm.

Minister for Development Cooperation Christian Friis Bach says:

“This incredibly harsh natural disaster has tragically affected millions of people, leaving hundreds of thousands in need and mourning, and thousands are feared dead. In the coming days, we expect to see a great need for tents, blankets, food, potable water and medicine”.

“As an initial rapid response, we have allocated DKK 10 million for emergency aid in the hardest hit areas. We are now awaiting an assessment from the UN and the many people on the ground about what specific action should be taken”.

In the next few days, the UN is expected to issue a formal emergency aid appeal.

In addition to the DKK 10 million pledge, Denmark will provide a coordination centre and a base camp equipped with tents, electricity, water, etc. for use by the preliminary coordination effort during the first weeks. This support will be delivered through a cooperation between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark and the Danish Emergency Management Agency. Danish personnel will also be deployed to help coordinate the relief efforts in close cooperation with other countries’ emergency management agencies.

Denmark is also seeking to abate the humanitarian crisis through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark’s emergency aid funds, which can be released through civil Danish organisations. In response to an enquiry by the International Red Cross Federation, the Danish Red Cross is providing IT and communication equipment for the effort in the Philippines. The Danish Red Cross will also deploy staff to assess the location and operation of a potential camp to help the relief efforts. Meanwhile, Save the Children Denmark has allocated DKK 500,000 from the emergency aid funds to their efforts in the Philippines and DanChurchAid is awaiting the initial need analyses before making a final decision on the use of emergency aid funds.

Denmark also contributes DKK 100 million annually to the UN’s central emergency fund, which exists to ensure significant and rapid aid in response to crises such as Typhoon Haiyan.

For more information, please contact:

Frej Jackson, Press Adviser for the Minister for Development Cooperation, tel: (+45) 29724477