Tacloban City declares a curfew from 10 pm to 6 am

Published 1:33 PM, November 12, 2013

TACLOBAN CITY, Philippines - The government said Tuesday, November 12, it had deployed armored vehicles, set up checkpoints and imposed a curfew to help end looting in a city devastated by Super Typhoon Haiyan.

Tacloban – on the central island of Leyte – bore the brunt of Friday's category-five storm with at least 10,000 people feared to have died there, according to the United Nations.

The devastated provincial capital, a city of 220,000 residents, has also seen some of the worst pillaging. Famished survivors desperate for food and medical supplies have ransacked aid convoys, hampering relief efforts.

Survivors have reported gangs stealing consumer goods including televisions and washing machines from small businesses.

Contain looting

Interior Secretary Mar Roxas said 4 Simba armored personnel carriers had been deployed to contain looting and help restore law and order, a day after hundreds of Philippine soldiers and police were sent to the city.

"We are circulating them (the Simbas) in the city to show the people, especially those with bad intentions, that the authorities have returned," Roxas told DZMM radio.

Checkpoints have been set up to stop people from mobbing relief trucks, he said.

Super Typhoon Haiyan – one of the strongest storms on record – flattened buildings and knocked out electricity and water supplies as tsunami-like waves and brutal winds tore across large swathes of the of the archipelago, leaving survivors with virtually nothing.

Many resorted to looting with a charity saying that in one case, a man with a machete tried to rob aid workers who were receiving a delivery of medicine.

Curfew

"The presence of policemen, military and government forces will definitely improve things (but) it will not be overnight," Roxas said, confirming reports that the Tacloban City government had imposed a curfew on residents of 10 pm to 6 am.

"It is a tool that we are using to minimise the looting and break-ins. We know some people cannot return home (during the curfew) because their homes were washed away but it is more effective against roving gangs who are looking for targets of opportunity," he said.

It is not clear where newly homeless residents are meant to go during this period.

Roxas added that the public works department had cleared at least one lane of a highway entering the city, which would speed up entry of supplies. It is hoped that incidences of looting will decrease as food relief flows in to the isolated area.

Roxas said the government's three main priorities were to restore peace and order, bring in relief goods and start collecting dead bodies.

"Now that we have achieved number one and two, the priority is the recovery of the cadavers," he said. - Rappler.com

Help the victims of Typhoon Yolanda (international codename: Haiyan). Visit Rappler's list of ongoing relief operations in your area. Tell us about your relief and recovery initiatives, email move.ph@rappler.com or tweet us @moveph.

Visit rappler.com/typhoon-yolanda for the latest updates on Typhoon Yolanda.







