Charice, Jennifer Hudson, Jessica Sanchez, Pentatonix are among a varied group of people coming together to help with Yolanda relief from NYC

Published 1:44 PM, March 11, 2014

MANILA, Philippines – International Filipino singer Charice Pempengco is set to join other globally known acts including American Idol finalists Jessica Sanchez, Jennifer Hudson in a concert for the benefit of Super Typhoon Yolanda (Haiyan) survivors.

All proceeds of the #Pinoy Relief Benefit Concert, happening on March 11 at The Theatre at Madison Square Garden in New York, will be forwarded to victims of the typhoon, which devastated provinces in the Visayas in November 2013.

Aside from Filipino-American Jessica Sanchez, artists with Pinoy lineage such as rapper apl.de.ap, actor Dante Basco, and Oscar-winning songwriter Robert Lopez (“Let It Go,” from Frozen). Lopez's wife and "Let It Go" co-writer Kristen Anderson-Lopez will be appearing.

Pinoy band from Tacloban Reo Brothers is also set to perform.

The concert will feature other performances from international acts Pentatonix, Plain White T's, A Great Big World, and DJ Poet Name Life, with an appearance by doctor and television personality Dr. Oz.

Several of the featured acts took to Twitter to promote the concert and express their excitement at performing.

So excited to perform with @IAMJHUD and @AGreatBigWorld for the Pinoy Relief Concert in New York on Tuesday!!! pic.twitter.com/bKoTivubeA — Jessica Sanchez (@JessicaESanchez) March 6, 2014

So excited to be part of @PinoyRelief initiative. Join me for a special benefit concert tomorrow at @TheGarden! Tix: http://t.co/C1IHPylGkf — Jennifer Hudson (@IAMJHUD) March 10, 2014

We are so honored to perform at the @PinoyRelief Benefit this Tuesday 3/11 in NYC. Get tix at: http://t.co/w9uNimORQl pic.twitter.com/6i9jlHzaLE — A Great Big World (@AGreatBigWorld) March 7, 2014

According to its website, Pinoy Relief aims to harness the “power of a global community” through “aggregated resources, crisis expertise, and awareness.”

“We aim to stabilize affected communities by providing resources, life necessities, temporary facilities and tools to farmers, fishermen, small businesses, teachers, doctors, individuals and families.”

The organization, founded in the wake of the typhoon, is led by a group of individuals with expertise in “crisis management, disaster management, medicine, finance and charitable foundation gift giving best practices.”

Ticket prices start at US $48.65 and are available through TicketMaster. – Rappler.com