MANILA, Philippines – Filipino communities and other nations continue to offer assistance for those affected by Supertyphoon “Yolanda” (international name: Haiyan) in the Philippines, the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) said Tuesday.

The Samahan ng mga Filipino sa Lebanon (SAMAFIL) and the Filipino Community Association (FCA) in Lebanon were able to raise P100,050 through their fund drive.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Of the collected amount, P50,025 will be sent to the victims of the recent earthquake in Bohol and nearby provinces and the balance will be sent to the victims of super typhoon Yolanda, all through the Philippine Red Cross (PRC),” DFA said in a statement.

There are around 30,000 Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) in Lebanon.

The Kingdom of Bahrain, also in the Middle East, has offered to provide 90 tons of relief items to the Philippines, Ambassador to Bahrain Sahid Glang reported to DFA.

Bahrain King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa offered to send “4,000 food parcels; 2,216 personal hygiene packs; 20,000 blankets; 500 tents; 100 power generators; 20,000 towels; 20,000 pillows; 1,000 bottles of water; 2,000 water containers; and 1,000 pieces of mats,” DFA said.

“Bahrain targets to send the relief assistance by next week or as soon as practicable. Bahrain also pledged to set up a health center in the affected area as soon as the urgent needs of the survivors have been addressed,” it said.

Government officials of Bahrain expressed solidarity with the Philippines during this time of calamity. There are around 40,000 OFWs in Bahrain.

Justice Minister Shaikh Khalid bin Ali bin Abdullah Al Khalifa said that “Filipinos in Bahrain are a part of us, and Bahrain is ready and willing to provide assistance to the Philippines.”

Health Minister Sadiq Abdulkarim Al Shehabi remarked that the “Philippines is a nation that everybody loves’ and Bahrain wishes to show its support and concern for the Filipino people through such gesture of assistance.”

ADVERTISEMENT

The Australian state of New South Wales has pledged to provide A$500,000 for relief aid to the victims of the typhoon.

“We are witnessing a tragedy of epic proportions unfolding in the Philippines and the New South Wales (NSW) Government is ready to do what it can to assist in the emergency relief effort,” NSW Premier Barry O’Farrell said in a statement to the DFA.

“Our thoughts are with those in the region left devastated by the typhoon, including the many Filipino-Australians who have lost loved ones or may not know yet their fate,” O’Farrell said.

Australia, home to around 177,400 OFWs, had pledged A$30 million in aid, which the NSW government said it would add to.

“A major response is now underway with the Philippine Government and humanitarian aid agencies scrambling to provide food, water and supplies to hundreds of thousands of people impacted by the storm,” O’Farrell said.

“The NSW Government has joined the Australian Government and international community to help the Philippine Government provide immediate humanitarian assistance,” he added.

Related Stories:

Yolanda: After the storm