Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption BBC's Alice Bhandhukravi went along to the sale at the British Red Cross shop in Chelsea

Members of the public have been queuing outside a west London charity shop to buy designer clothes donated by David and Victoria Beckham.

The collection of clothes includes shoes by Jimmy Choo and suits by Dolce and Gabbana.

The money raised from the sale at the British Red Cross shop in Chelsea will be used to help victims of Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines.

Mrs Beckham said others should donate clothes for the cause.

British contribution £100m

Earlier on Friday, the National Disaster Agency in the Philippines announced that the death toll of the typhoon which ripped through the country on 8 November had risen to 5,209, with many more missing.

Donations from the British public and the government in the aftermath of the typhoon have topped £100m.

Image caption There were queues outside the charity shop in Chelsea

Image caption Victoria Beckham's shoes were among donated items that went on sale

Image caption Victoria Beckham tweeted a picture of the shoes she was donating

Image caption Items donated by the Beckhams were marked out from the rest of the stock

Image caption Victoria Beckham appealed to others to dig out unwanted items

Mrs Beckham said: "Everyone has something in their closet they were holding on to - a dress, suit, or pair of shoes they thought they might wear again.

"Dig them out, bag them up, drop them off and give someone else the chance to buy them, raising much-needed funds for the Red Cross aid effort."

Ahead of the sale, Victoria Beckham tweeted pictures of a large pile of designer shoes that she was donating to be sold at the shop, which is located at 69-71 Old Church Street in Chelsea.

'Significant funds'

The shop operated a one in one out policy, with a maximum of 50 people allowed in the shop at any one time.

Prices ranged from £25 for ties and belts to £250 for jackets.

Mrs Beckham's clothes were a UK size four and her shoes a size four or four-and-a-half.

Some customers queued for more than an hour, and each person was allowed to purchase only one item from the 20 boxes of goods donated.

The charity's director of fundraising, Mark Astarita, said the Beckhams' donation "will enable us to raise significant funds towards the enormous humanitarian operation currently under way".

He told BBC London: "One of Victoria's dresses will buy 50 blankets; one of David's suits will buy 14 tarpaulins. It really can make a difference to people in the Philippines."

He said he hoped the sale would have raised £40,000 by the time the shop closes at 20:00 GMT.

Customers at British Red Cross shops can specifically request their donations be used to aid the victims of Typhoon Haiyan as part of the charity's Shop Drop for the Philippines campaign.