Emergency teams sent to assess the damage of storm that has already forced evacuation of more than a million people

The UN and other relief agencies are preparing to send emergency teams to assess the damage from typhoon Haiyan, which has forced more than a million people to flee from coastal and low-lying areas in the Philippines.

Haiyan – or Yolanda as it is called in the Philippines – is the third major disaster to hit the country in the past two months. Some 75,000 people are living in displacement centres in the southern port of Zamboanga after recent fighting, while 350,000 people are living in tents and other temporary shelters on Bohol, after an earthquake that killed 200 people, near where Haiyan made landfall early on Friday.

"This is a trifecta of disasters," said Leonard Doyle, head of online communications at the UN's International Organisation of Migration. "There has been the rebellion in Zamboanga, there was the earthquake in Bohol. Now we have the typhoon on top of that. We have no idea of the consequences yet, but it's going to be devastating by the time the dust settles. People will have lost their homes, everything. All this places a burden on the country."

The joint typhoon warning centre in Hawaii says the storm will be stronger than the one that hit Mindanao, the southernmost island in the Philippines, in December 2012, killing more than 1,000 people and leaving thousands homeless.

The typhoon has ripped off roofs, uprooted trees and affected businesses, but the extent of the damage will not be known until the storm has passed. In Manila, advertising billboards were rolled up to prevent them from being swept away by high winds. Schools shut early amid torrential rain, but there is no sense of panic as the country is used to dealing with typhoons, although not as powerful as this.

Haiyan, a category-5 super-typhoon, swept the northern tip of Cebu province and headed north-west towards Boracay island, both tourist destinations, after lashing the central islands of Leyte and Samar with 170 mph (275 kph) wind gusts and 15-19ft waves.

At least three people have been killed and seven injured, a national disaster agency spokesman, Rey Balido, told reporters in Manila. The death toll is expected to rise. Evacuation centres, such as gyms, schools or halls, have been identified, and local government officials are monitoring residents who live along riverbanks and landslide- and flood-prone areas.

"They should be transferred to safe places immediately with the onset of floods and landslide after the arrival of the typhoon," Flor Gaviola, from the office of civil defence, said.

The governor of Albay province, in Bicol region, Joey Salceda, sent a text message to local residents declaring a state of heightened alert and close monitoring. "This is to ensure disaster avoidance and to achieve zero casualty," he said.

Preparedness measures included: 300 coastguard boats on standby for rescue; activation of the national police's disaster incident management task group; $4m (£2m) of emergency relief on standby from the department of social welfare and development; and Philippines Red Cross rescue equipment, including rubber boats, generator sets, fuel and vehicles, set for deployment.

"We expect the level of destruction caused by typhoon Haiyan to be extensive and devastating," said Anna Lindenfors, Save the Children's country director for the Philippines. "Our priority at this time is to help the children who are being affected.

"Our teams on the ground were well prepared and we deployed a rapid response team to Tacloban, a heavily populated area where the storm was expected to hit hardest. We will be distributing emergency kits for children and families, including toiletries, cleaning items, temporary school tents and education materials."