Dollar-for-dollar matching for all donations to Singapore

Red Cross Typhoon Haiyan Relief Appeal

Oxley Holdings to match public donations dollar for dollar, up to S$1 million

13 November 2013 – The Singapore Red Cross’ fundraising efforts have been bolstered by Oxley Holdings’ commitment to match public donations to its Typhoon Haiyan Relief Appeal, dollar-for-dollar, for up to S$1 million.

Typhoon Haiyan, the most powerful typhoon ever to make landfall in recorded history, has left a trail of destruction across nine regions of the Philippines affecting an estimated 10 million people. Based on official figures from the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council as of 11 November 2013, 1,744 lives have been lost, 2,487 injured, 600,000 displaced, close to 14,000 homes destroyed and nearly 9,800 damaged. There is further expectation that these figures will rise significantly in the coming days as assessments are still in progress.

“We are very lucky to be based in Singapore, where we are shielded from natural disasters. The devastation and loss caused by Typhoon Haiyan is quite shocking. It will be difficult for survivors of this disaster to overcome the hardship that they face now. We are in a position to help, and it is only right that we do so. I hope that Oxley’s dollar-for-dollar pledge will inspire other Singaporeans to chip in and relieve the suffering by supporting Singapore Red Cross’ urgent work,” said Mr Ching Chiat Kwong, Executive Chairman & CEO, Oxley Holdings.

“We thank Oxley Holdings for their support. I believe the initiative would catalyst more donations, which would allow more humanitarian aid to be delivered to survivors in need. Over the past few days, we have witnessed an outpouring of compassion from the people of Singapore – we are grateful to everyone who’s come forward to help,” said Mr Lim Theam Poh, Deputy Secretary General, Singapore Red Cross.

Since it issued its appeal for donations on 11 November, the Singapore Red Cross has received over $145,000 in donations from members of the public, and $200,000 from the Singapore Government.

Singapore Red Cross relief efforts to date:

Contributed $100,000 in emergency relief supplies

Dedicated fundraising appeal to receive donations for Typhoon Haiyan relief efforts

Hotlines for ‘Restoring Family Links’ service to assist Singaporeans and Filipinos in locating their family members who may have been affected by the disaster and with whom they have difficulty contacting.

Deploying a team of Singapore Red Cross volunteers and staff to the affected areas in Visayas on 14 November, to help with the distribution of relief items.

Preparing three medical teams on standby for deployment in the coming weeks.