TYPHOON HAIYAN LEAVES EASTERN SAMAR SURF COMMUNITY IN SHAMBLES Aid organizations on ground in Philippines making inroads to devastated areas By Kage Gozun

Published: November 12, 2013

November 12, 2013 Views: 5,383







TYPHOON HAIYAN LEAVES EASTERN SAMAR SURF COMMUNITY IN SHAMBLES Full report: Aid organizations on ground in Philippines making inroads to devastated areas; still much work to be done..





1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Related Aerial image taken from a Philippine Air Force helicopter shows the devastation caused by typhoon Haiyan in Guiuan. Photo: Bullit Marquez/AP

Authorities said at least two million people in 41 provinces had been affected by Friday's typhoon and at least 23,000 houses had been damaged or destroyed.

Residents walk beside a large ship that was washed ashore by strong surge in Tacloban. Photo: Aaron Favila/AP

Typhoon Haiyan, one of the strongest storms on record, slammed into six central Philippine islands on Friday, leaving a wide swath of destruction.

This photo, taken last year, was very close to the landfall point of Typhoon Haiyan. Little information has been received from this area and all communication links have been destroyed. Relief supplies have arrived at the airport nearby, a facility constructed by US Navy engineers in 1944. Photo: Alan Van Gysen

The Surf Camp, a charming and hospitable accommodation on Calicoan Island, very close to the point of landfall and most likely heavily damaged by the typhoon. Photo: John Callahan

A left reef break in Eastern Samar Province, one of many quality waves in this area. Photo: Alan Van Gysen

Guiuan sits on the edge of Eastern Samar. The sleepy town has slowly been gaining popularity in the Philippine surf community.



Typhoon Haiyan first made landfall in the Philippines on Friday at 4:40am.

Storm surges were so strong, ships were thrown on dry land. Power was down. Roads impassable. Even the strongest buildings could not stand against the force of Haiyan's winds and it would later come to light that the entire city had been leveled with 100% structural damage.



Search and rescue teams recovered bodies in the water, on streets, in the middle of fallen buildings. On the first day alone, the death toll was predicted to be in the thousands.



Imagine a city of 200,000 people completely destroyed. Now imagine what kind of havoc this typhoon caused in a smaller town, miles away from Tacloban, an area that was the first point of impact when Haiyan decided to literally blow through the Philippines. That town is Guiuan.



Guiuan sits on the edge of Eastern Samar. The sleepy town has slowly been gaining popularity in the Philippine surf community as a new "last frontier." ABCD break on Calicoan Island is a powerful lefthander that has been likened to Siargao's now-famous Cloud 9. During the national competition last year, it turned on and produced 10- to 12-foot surf that made the international world sit up and take notice when photos hit the Internet.



The local surf community is small, but making inroads in national competitions. Exposure to the larger surf world gave the island not only income but also opportunities for local surfers to up their game as they competed against the best surfers in the country.



And then the typhoon happened.



The Philippine surf community waited for news on Guiuan. And kept waiting. For most of Sunday, we waited and saw nothing on the news, nothing on the internet, nothing at all about Guiuan, Eastern Samar. No calls to friends were making it through. In the age of instant information, to not know immediately what the situation was down south was both frustrating and frightening.

"I want the donations to get to the people there because they haven't eaten in a long time and are very hungry." -- local Guiuan surfer Norman Dalora



When news finally made it to Manila, it broke the Philippine surf community's collective hearts. Aerial photos showed the extent of Haiyan's wrath. If Tacloban was decimated, Guiuan looked obliterated. Not a single building was left untouched, entire blocks of houses turned into nothing more than rubble and ruin. Not a single tree left standing. But, because there was no communication with residents and no way to get to them via land routes, there was still no word on how people were doing. All was conjecture. Locals could see where friends' houses used to be, but didn't know where their friends were.



In the days since we have learned that roads are mostly impassable and the best way to get sorely needed relief goods to the municipalities is through the small landing strip in Guiuan. There is no official count on deaths and casualties although word has gotten out that the tally is not as high as those in neighboring municipalities.



On November 12th, there are two separate teams heading to Guiuan with relief goods and medical aid. One of them has members from Malibu-based The Surf Institute and will be carrying supplies for water filtration systems to provide clean drinking water. On Friday, another shipment is set to be deployed to Guiuan, with goods collected by the rest of the Philippine surf community, all of whom have pulled together to raise funds in their own breaks so they can send help to another.



Norman Dalora is a local surfer from Guiuan who was in Manila when the typhoon struck. He is among the volunteers going to Guiuan on November 12. When asked what he thinks about heading into the wreckage of his home he said, "The number one thing I want to do is see my family and my friends. I already know they are alive but I won't rest easy until I see them."



Dalora went on to say that he has accepted that their homes have been reduced to nothing but that houses can always be rebuilt. What matters most is that people are alive and will be getting help. "I want the donations to get to the people there because they haven't eaten in a long time and are very hungry."



To help:



-Donate to



-Donate to



-Donate to



Check your local Red Cross chapter to find out what relief goods or cash donations are still needed. When news finally made it to Manila, it broke the Philippine surf community's collective hearts. Aerial photos showed the extent of Haiyan's wrath. If Tacloban was decimated, Guiuan looked obliterated. Not a single building was left untouched, entire blocks of houses turned into nothing more than rubble and ruin. Not a single tree left standing. But, because there was no communication with residents and no way to get to them via land routes, there was still no word on how people were doing. All was conjecture. Locals could see where friends' houses used to be, but didn't know where their friends were.In the days since we have learned that roads are mostly impassable and the best way to get sorely needed relief goods to the municipalities is through the small landing strip in Guiuan. There is no official count on deaths and casualties although word has gotten out that the tally is not as high as those in neighboring municipalities.On November 12th, there are two separate teams heading to Guiuan with relief goods and medical aid. One of them has members from Malibu-based The Surf Institute and will be carrying supplies for water filtration systems to provide clean drinking water. On Friday, another shipment is set to be deployed to Guiuan, with goods collected by the rest of the Philippine surf community, all of whom have pulled together to raise funds in their own breaks so they can send help to another.Norman Dalora is a local surfer from Guiuan who was in Manila when the typhoon struck. He is among the volunteers going to Guiuan on November 12. When asked what he thinks about heading into the wreckage of his home he said, "The number one thing I want to do is see my family and my friends. I already know they are alive but I won't rest easy until I see them."Dalora went on to say that he has accepted that their homes have been reduced to nothing but that houses can always be rebuilt. What matters most is that people are alive and will be getting help. "I want the donations to get to the people there because they haven't eaten in a long time and are very hungry."-Donate to Waves for Water -Donate to ShelterBox for disaster relief by way of emergency shelters.-Donate to The Surf Institute Check your local Red Cross chapter to find out what relief goods or cash donations are still needed.

Wind speeds were estimated to be as high as 235mph. Haiyan, locally known as Yolanda, swept through the Visayas region for two days, starting in the province of Eastern Samar, then across to the province of Leyte and exiting through the islands of Palawan. Filipinos in these affected areas had braced themselves for the worst.But no one could imagine the devastation the typhoon would leave behind.To put it bluntly, it was nothing short of catastrophic. The province of Leyte became the focus as early reports began to filter in that the entire city of Tacloban had been decimated.