MILWAUKEE, Nov. 20, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Nearly 11.3 million people across the Philippines have been affected by Typhoon Haiyan. The storm has displaced more than 500,000 and the need for food, shelter and medical services far exceeds supply.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130206/CG55426LOGO)

Northwestern Mutual, through its Foundation, is responding by announcing a $100,000 grant to the American Red Cross to help get lifesaving support to those in the Philippines who need it most. This gift complements the two-year $500,000 grant, announced by the Northwestern Mutual Foundation last year, to the American Red Cross's Disaster Responder Program.

"Although the Philippines is thousands of miles away, the devastation created by the magnitude of this natural disaster affects all of us," said John Kordsmeier, president, Northwestern Mutual Foundation. "It can be difficult to imagine the extent to which this type of destruction decimates entire communities, but as a company, and as individuals, we must come together at this crucial time. Together, we can bring hope to those in such desperate need across the globe."

Additionally, in the Midwest, strong fall storms ravaged cities and towns, where members of Northwestern Mutual's financial representatives and clients live. More than 80 tornadoes were reported with this widespread storm, leaving many in need of shelter and food. The Northwestern Mutual Foundation has set up microsites for donations from employees and its financial representatives across the country that want to support the American Red Cross's efforts in the Midwest as well as the Philippines.

About the Northwestern Mutual Foundation

The mission of the Northwestern Mutual Foundation is to improve the lives of underserved children and families. The Foundation has given more than $250 million since its inception in 1992 and is designed to create lasting impact in the communities where the company's employees and financial representatives live and work. We accomplish this by combining financial support, volunteerism, thought leadership and convening community partners to deliver the best outcomes. Our efforts are focused nationally on curing childhood cancer, and locally on education, neighborhoods and making our hometown of Milwaukee a great destination.

About Northwestern Mutual

Northwestern Mutual is among the "World's Most Admired" life insurance companies in 2013 according to FORTUNE® magazine and has helped clients achieve financial security for more than 156 years. As a mutual company with $1.4 trillion of life insurance protection in force, Northwestern Mutual has no shareholders. The company focuses solely and directly on its clients and seeks to deliver consistent and dependable value to them over time.

Northwestern Mutual is the marketing name for The Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, Milwaukee, WI, and its subsidiaries. Northwestern Mutual and its subsidiaries offer a holistic approach to financial security solutions including: life insurance, long-term care insurance, disability income insurance, annuities, investment products, and advisory products and services. Subsidiaries include Northwestern Mutual Investment Services, LLC, broker-dealer, registered investment adviser, member FINRA and SIPC; the Northwestern Mutual Wealth Management Company, limited purpose federal savings bank; Northwestern Long Term Care Insurance Company; and Russell Investments.

SOURCE Northwestern Mutual

Related Links

http://www.northwesternmutual.com

