THE navy's sole emergency response vessel, the heavy landing ship HMAS Tobruk, has left Townsville bound for storm ravaged Tacloban in the Philippines.

The ship will come under United States command and will be used to deliver emergency supplies to isolated coastal communities on the island of Leyte.

Tobruk will take about seven days to reach Tacloban city where she will unload some supplies and take on others before moving down the coast.

News_Module: NND Haiyan Typhoon Multipromo

Due to her unique design, the ship can drive up onto beaches, and with her 50-tonne landing craft she will be able to get large quantities of supplies to hard hit communities away from the main relief effort.

The Tobruk is also carrying Unimog trucks and Land Rover vehicles to be used to transport supplies from the beach head to isolated villages.

"The ship will be able to get far greater volumes of supplies onto the beach than a fleet of helicopters," a spokesman said.

News_Module: NND Philippines Before &After Slider - 1

The crew includes a team of elite and heavily armed Navy clearance divers who will be responsible for the surveying beaches and will double as a security detail if necessary.

HMAS Tobruk is carrying a load that includes water purification, power generation and earth moving equipment plus supplies of bottled water, tents and vehicles.

According to sources the government of the Philippines have been overwhelmed by the scale of the disaster and the United States Pacific Command has stepped in to coordinate the relief operation.

News_Module: NND Philippines Before &After Slider - 2

The Tobruk and her 150-strong crew will join the British warship HMS Daring under US direction for the operation.

Defence Minister David Johnston last week said HMAS Tobruk was ideally suited to any recovery effort requested given her amphibious heavy lift capability, on board accommodation and ability to support helicopter and landing craft operations.

News_Module: NND Philippines Before &After Slider - 3

###