HAIYAN

Govt to help Philippines storm victims Published: 14 Nov 2013 at 00.00

Newspaper section: News .

The government will send food, drinking water and medical aid to help victims in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan that hit the Philippines last week.

Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra told the Public Health Ministry, the three branches of the armed forces and the Foreign Affairs Ministry to take responsibility for organising the aid.

The government welcomed all public donations under a fund called "Thais help Filipinos".

Typhoon Haiyan killed thousands of people in hard-hit cities such as Tacloban on the island of Leyte, forcing hundreds of thousands of people to evacuate to safety and leaving behind a trail of devastation on a scale the Philippines has never seen before.

Public Health Minister Pradit Sintawanarong said yesterday his ministry will send medical personnel and 20 million baht worth of medicine to help the victims.

Dr Pradit said sending aid to neighbouring countries was in line with the premier's policy.

He said the ministry will send more than 15 field physicians and set up a mobile clinic there. The medical operation will last for two weeks.

He said he had ordered the Government Pharmaceutical Organisation to prepare medicines such as antibiotics, anti-infectious disease drugs, first-aid drugs and saline.

The Foreign Ministry will work with the Philippine government to arrange the aid.

Defence Ministry spokesman Thanathip Sawangsang said the ministry will send a C130 transport plane carrying two military doctors, 10 soldiers and two sniffer dogs to the Philippines.

Col Thanathip said the navy will also send ships to join the government's mission to help the victims.

Intercontinental Samui www.samui.intercontinental.com Luxury Beach Resort in Koh Samui. Special Offers & Packages, Book Now

Bangkok Post online classifieds Try buying & selling goods and properties 24/7 in our classifieds which has high purchasing power local & expatriate audience from within Thailand and around the world.

.