The DJ created a new video to raise awareness of and money for Haiyan victims.

DJ David Guetta teamed up with the UN to help generate funds to provide aid to the Philippines. (Photo: Buda Mendes, Getty Images) Story Highlights He's created a new video for his song 'One Voice' to promote the campaign

He'll donate a dollar every time #love is tweeted out

More than 4,000 died in Typhoon Haiyan

For superstar DJ David Guetta, seeing the decimation of the eastern Philippines that Typhoon Haiyan left in its wake was just the same as it was for the rest of the world: horrifying.

Reports surged of casualties (more than 4,000 dead, by the latest estimate), looting and aid unable to reach victims. As the shock faded, Guetta's next reaction was, what could he do?

"I wanted to help, but I didn't know how, so I went to the people that do," he says. He has partnered with the United Nations to kick off "The World Needs More ..." campaign to help victims of natural disasters and conflict. Leveraging his fame (891 million page views of his YouTube videos and nearly 1.5 billion on Vevo), Guetta hopes his fans can raise the millions the Philippines will need, not just for relief, but to rebuild.

"Working with the U.N., with the people who really are in charge, has been an inspiring and humbling experience," he says. "I created the video especially for this campaign, and use it to reach out to fans." The new video for his song One Voice will premiere on the wall of the U.N. Secretariat Building at 8:30 p.m. ET. It will also be streamed live on both Guetta's Facebook page and the campaign website, where the video will be featured exclusively.

For fans to do their part, all they need to do is tweet. Here's how it works: Businesses sponsor a word that the world can use more of, like "compassion" or "awareness," and each time that word is tweeted out with the hashtag or used on the campaign website, that sponsor will donate a dollar.

Guetta has already sponsored #love. To unlock the dollar donation from Guetta, for instance, share a double hashtag #theworldneedsmore# #love either on Twitter or the campaign website. (In the U.S., you can also text #theworldneedsmore to 90999 to personally donate a dollar.) With millions of followers, that hopefully means a lot of money. "I wanted to find a way for people to help using the power of social media and my network," he says. "Life has to continue for everyone, even when a catastrophe happens, but there is a way to help and to better prepare for the next one.

"When I play, people are as one on the dance floor. I want the same for the world. No matter how busy you are or where you are, we all share this planet and help each other. We should be as one."

&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;!--iframe--&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt;

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/I6YQy2