NEW DELHI -- State-owned Indian Oil Corp. (IOC) has lost its fuel monopoly in Nepal which has signed a deal with China to import petroleum products.

The land-locked and fuel-starved Himalayan country at present imports all its petroleum needs from India at a cost of some $1.1 billion each year.

Supplies have been badly affected by recent violent protests by Madhesi people who live in Nepal's fertile Terai plains bordering India.

Other trade at crucial border crossings has also been disrupted as Madhesis and other minorities protested against perceived discrimination in the constitution promulgated on Sept. 20.

With fuel imports from India impeded, Nepal Oil Corporation (NOC) and China National United Oil Corporation (PetroChina) signed a memorandum of understanding on Oct. 28.

Nepal's embassy in Beijing said a separate agreement was also signed for the expeditious delivery of 1,000 metric tons of petroleum grant assistance by China as a goodwill gesture.

China's government confirmed on Thursday that it is providing "a certain amount of fuel as emergency assistance" to Nepal at Kathmandu's request.

"A working group from Nepal was in China for discussions on trade in oil products with the relevant Chinese counterpart," Spokesperson Lu Kang said at a foreign ministry briefing the day after NOC Managing Director Gopal Bahadur Khadka and PetroChina Vice President Zhang Tong signed a memorandum of understanding.

Lu also used the opportunity to congratulate Bidhya Bhandari on her election as Nepal's first woman president. "China and Nepal are friendly neighbors," he said. "The Chinese side supports Nepal's efforts to safeguard national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and will continue to do all it can to help with Nepal's development."

Kathmandu has accused New Delhi of an unofficial blockade to express its unhappiness with the new constitution. Indian officials say the import obstructions are on the Nepalese side.

The two countries share an open 1,850km border. Nepal has no oil and has hitherto been entirely dependent on India, its largest trading partner and sole gateway to the outside world.

In recent years, China has assisted Nepal with infrastructure. It also provided aid alongside India following devastating earthquakes in April.

In a regulatory filing on Aug. 25, IOC said it had inked an agreement with NOC regarding construction of an oil pipeline with an annual capacity of 1.3 million tons.

The Kathmandu Post reported on Friday that IOC increased fuel supplies from four border points after the Nepal-China fuel deal was signed. On Thursday alone, 131 fuel tankers crossed into Nepal. This is thought to be the largest fuel delivery since Sept. 22.