The Ministry of Health and Population has not sent emergency medicines to the District Health Offices for the past two months

Nov 1, 2015-Several districts across the country are reeling under an acute shortage of medicines, including life saving drugs, due to India’s unofficial embargo on Nepal and the prolonged Tarai banda.

There is no supply of emergency medicines in Dolakha, Kavre and Ilam, among other districts. The Ministry of Health and Population has not sent emergency medicines to the District Health Offices for the past two months. The stocks of medicines and surgical equipment in both government and private hospitals have already depleted.

Medicines for fever and common cold are also lacking in Dolakha. Chief of the District Health Office (DHO) in Dolakha, Dr Madhav Prasad Lamsal said they have no emergency medicines to cure children’s ailments. He told the Post that they are unable to send medicines to rural areas. Health posts in remote areas have no medicines and vaccines. Medical store operators in Dolakha said they cannot ferry medicines from the Indian border points. Services have been affected also in private hospitals in Charikot in the lack of oxygen.

In Ilam, patients of high blood pressure, diabetes and heart diseases have got no medicines. The DHO said the stocks of medicines in several health posts are depleting.

“The shortage of drugs was felt before Dashain began. Though the health organisations have asked for emergency supplies, we are unable to provide them,” said DHO chief Raj Kumar Pokharel. In particular, the medicines that the government distributes to the people free of cost are unavailable. There are no medicines and vaccines left at Chulachuli, Phhikkal and Mangalbare. Drug stores also have only a few items left with them.

Several rural health posts in Kavre district are also facing shortages of drugs. DHO chief Dr Rajendra Prasad Sah said they cannot distribute the medicines to health posts as the fuel dearth has made transportation difficult. “Emergency medicines are getting scarce in health posts,” said Sah.

Health services have been affected in Shankhupatichaur, Nangregagarche, Koshipari, Timal and Dapcha, among other villages. Dipak Ghimire, who is in charge of Shankhupatichaur Health Post, said they are unable to treat patients without the medicines.

Locals said patients from remote areas are unable to avail of treatment due to the transport disruption.

Published: 01-11-2015 08:51