A day after signing a first ever fuel agreement with Nepal, China said on Thursday it would continue to support Kathmandu's 'sovereignty and independence' and extend assistance, amid a continuing blockade on the Nepal-India border.

The Chinese government said it had decided to supply emergency fuel assistance after a working group from Nepal came to China for urgent talks, triggered by the continuing blockade of fuel imports from India.

Nepal had in the talks requested for emergency assistance to alleviate shortages that have been worsened by on-going blockades along the Nepal-India border on account of protests in the Madhesi region against the Constitution.

The deal ends India's status as a sole supplier of fuel for Nepal and will pave the way for closer economic relations and trade with China, officials said, amid Kathmandu's on-going differences with New Delhi over the Constitution issue.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry said on Thursday it would continue to support Nepal's efforts in ensuring its "sovereignty". "In response to a request from the Nepali side the Chinese government decided to supply a certain amount of emergency fuel assistance so as to help Nepal tide over fuel shortage," spokesperson Lu Kang said.

"A working group from Nepal also visited China. They had discussions with relevant authorities in China on the trade of oil products."

Lu also congratulated Nepal on the election of Bidhya Devi Bhandari as its first female president. "We hope under the leadership of the new president and the Nepali government, the Nepali people can unite together and jointly build a Nepal that is peaceful, stable and prosperous," Lu said.

China has taken a different position from India on the Constitution issue, giving its support to Kathmandu although Beijing has also urged Nepal to ensure interests of all sections are represented. "China and Nepal are friendly neighbours," added Lu. "We support Nepal in its efforts for ensuring independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. We will lend assistance to Nepal within our capabilities."

According to Nepali reports, the fuel agreement was reached with China after the working group held talks in Beijing. Details on the amount of fuel to be supplied and logistics still need to be worked out. The deal follows an earlier agreement to supply 1.3 million litres of gasoline.

China earlier this month also moved to reopen its land border with Nepal at an earlier-than-expected date. The border had been closed following an earthquake and landslides in Tibet. China accelerated construction work to reopen the border after Kathmandu requested urgent assistance following the blockade in the India border, which has strained India's ties with Nepal amid worsening fuel shortages.

