Last Updated: 2015-11-12

KATHMANDU, Nov 11 (NNN-Bernama) -- United Nations Secretary General BanKi-moon has called India to lift the blockade at the border that hascaused tremendous hardship to Nepalese people, My Republic English

daily reports from New York Wednesday.



The Secretary General Ban has asked all sides to lift the obstructions of essential supplies on the Nepal-India border without further delay, the English daily quoted Ban's spokesperson as saying.



Ban's spokesperson Stéphane Dujarric, in a weekly press briefing Wednesday, said, “The Secretary-General underlines Nepal’s right of free transit, as a landlocked nation as well as for humanitarian reasons, and calls on all sides to lift the obstructions without further delay,” the daily said.



"Acute shortages in fuel supplies have continued to impede deliveries to earthquake-affected villages in Nepal."



Humanitarian organizations urgently require fuel to maintain operations and deliver food, warm clothing and shelter materials to high altitude areas that will soon be cut off by harsh winter weather, Ban said.



Nepal is reeling under acute shortage of fuel and other essential goods including life saving medicines due to blockade on Nepal-India border as India has refused to allow vehicles carrying goods into Nepal.



Nepal terms it a blockade being in place for more than a month and says it is breach of landlocked country Nepal's transit right.



However, India denies it has imposed blockade but vehicles have not entered into Nepal from India due to protests by some Nepalese of Indian origins in Nepal's southern plain bordering with Nepal.



"This is a blockade which is against the international laws that allow landlocked country free access to sea and transit rights for trade with the third countries," said Nepalese Prime Minister KP Oli in a brief chat with Nepalese media person Tuesday.



Nepal is a landlocked country heavily dependent on India for trade and transit as its border with China is along the difficult terrain of the Himalayan range.



Nepal is surrounded by India in the east, west and south and by China in the north. -- NNN-BERNAMA