After 11 months of intensive operations EUFOR RCA has successfully completed its mission in Bangui and all components have left the Central African Republic to return to their countries, but at the same time the European mission EUMAM is deployed, to facilitate the reorganization of the Central African armed forces. After having handed over the responsibility of the airport one the 17th of November, EUFOR has transferred the responsibility of both 3rd and 5th districts to MINUSCA on the 28th of February, at a symbolic parade with all International Forces and Transitional Authorities.

A mission of the United Nations Security Council visited EUFOR last week in order to assess the situation in the Central African Republic. Representatives of the 15 members of the organization currently chaired by France arrived in Bangui for a 48 hours stay, and attended meetings with transition authorities and the international community.

Major General Philippe Pontiès (Operation Commander)

The Council established on 10 February 2014 an EU military operation to contribute to a secure environment in the Central African Republic, as authorised by the UN Security Council in resolution 2134 (2014). This decision created the legal basis for the operation entitled EUFOR RCA and was another step towards its rapid deployment.

The mission ended its mandate and has been closed on the 15 March 2015.

EUFOR RCA provided temporary support in achieving a safe and secure environment in the Bangui area, with a view to handing over to African partners. The force contributed to international efforts to protect the populations most at risk, creating the conditions for providing humanitarian aid.

The Former EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, Catherine Ashton, said: "We have reacted swiftly to the serious crisis in the Central African Republic. We are using all the tools at our disposal, from humanitarian assistance to political support for the transition, to our long-term development cooperation. But the absolute priority is to protect the civilian population from any further violence, to ensure that the people of the Central African Republic can live without fear and start rebuilding their country, and to make sure that humanitarian aid can be provided. EUFOR RCA will deploy as soon as possible to back the remarkable efforts of France and our African partners."

Major General Philippe Pontiès [57 KB] was appointed by the EU's Political and Security Committeeas Operation Commander.

General Jean Marc Bacquet [427 KB] was appointed as Force Commander of the European Union military mission in the Central African Republic on December 2014. He took over command from General Thierry Lion [88 KB] , who led the EU Force for over eight months.

More