African Union suspends Central African Republic after coup

The African Union imposes sanctions and warns that rebel leaders could face trial. The rebels are divided over who should lead the Central African Republic.

"It is a sad moment for our country," Zuma said, as controversy raged over the government's failure to pull out its forces. "Our soldiers paid the ultimate price in the service of their country. Just over 200 of our soldiers fought bandits who wanted to cause harm, but the actions of these bandits would not deter us from our mission of peace and security."

South African President Jacob Zuma condemned the rebels as "bandits" at a news conference in Pretoria, confirming the deaths of at least 13 South African soldiers in a nine-hour battle. Twenty-seven others were wounded.

In an ominous sign that could presage more fighting, the rebels appeared deeply divided, openly contradicting one another about who should be leader. One rebel leader threatened more violence, indicating he was willing to attack other rebels.

JOHANNESBURG, South Africa —The African Union suspended the Central African Republic on Monday and imposed sanctions after President Francois Bozize's ouster, warning that rebel coup leaders could face trial.

Zuma added that South Africa rejects any seizure of power by force.

The African Union's peace and security chief, Ramtane Lamamra, called on the organization's members to isolate the leaders of the rebel alliance, known as Seleka, and requested that they support any other future steps by the union, including the trial of the rebels for toppling the president.

"The council has decided to suspend with immediate effect Central African Republic from all African Union activities and to impose sanctions, travel restrictions and an asset freeze on Seleka's leaders," said Lamamra, addressing journalists in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

African Union Chairwoman Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, a senior South African official and former wife of Zuma, condemned the rebel takeover, as did United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

Seleka rebels, an alliance of militias from the north of the country, swept into the capital, Bangui, on Saturday, seized the presidential palace after heavy fighting and took control Sunday. Bozize fled the country and is reportedly in Cameroon, but he has made no statement since the rebels took power.

One rebel leader, Michel Djotodia, declared himself the new president in an interview Monday with Radio France International. But another, Nelson Ndjadder, said in an interview with the Associated Press in Paris that the rebels didn't recognize Djotodia, adding that he could topple him.

"We do not recognize him as president.... For your information, I have enough soldiers loyal to me to attack Djotodia," he said. Ndjadder said the original plan was to arrest Bozize and announce a swift transition. He accused Djotodia's forces of looting people's houses.

"We came to liberate the people, not to steal from them. This is shameful. Unacceptable," he said.

In an effort to calm the storm of international criticism, Djotodia said he would keep many members of the government of national unity formed in January, including the prime minister, Nicolas Tiangaye, who was drawn from the opposition.

"We will not conduct a witch hunt," he said. He promised elections within three years, in accordance with the January peace deal, but wouldn't say how long he planned to remain president.

"I can't say because you know full well that we need time to bring back peace. There is insecurity," Djotodia said.