Report DETAILS Print Email

Emergency Message for U.S. Citizens: Bangui (Central African Republic), Armed Group Movement

Crime

Africa > Central African Republic > Bangui



An unidentified armed group has reportedly moved south of Mbrès, approximately 300 km north of Bangui. Further progress south by this armed group is possible. As a precautionary measure the Embassy has suspended all overland travel by its personnel outside of Bangui and cautions U.S. citizens to do the same.



You can stay in touch and get Embassy updates by checking the U.S. Embassy Bangui web site. You can also stay up to date by bookmarking our Bureau of Consular Affairs website, which contains the current Travel Warnings and Travel Alerts as well as the Worldwide Caution. Follow us on Twitter and the Bureau of Consular Affairs page on Facebook as well or you can download our free Smart Traveler iPhone App for travel information at your fingertips. If you don't have internet access, current information on safety and security can also be obtained by calling 1-888-407-4747 toll-free in the United States and Canada, or for callers from outside the United States, a regular toll line at 1-202-501-4444. These numbers are available from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday through Friday (except U.S. federal holidays).



If you are going to live in or travel to CAR, please take the time to tell us about your trip by enrolling in the Smart Traveler Enrollment Program. If you enroll, we can keep you up to date with important safety and security announcements. It will also help your friends and family get in touch with you in an emergency. You should remember to keep all of your information in STEP up to date. It is important during enrollment or updating of information to include your current phone number and current email address where you can be reached in case of an emergency.



The U.S. Embassy in Bangui is located on Avenue David Dacko. The Embassy’s telephone number is +236-21-61-02-00; callers within the CAR should dial 21-61-02-00. For after-hours emergencies, U.S. citizens should call +236-75-40-10-50 and ask to speak with the duty officer.







