PORT-AU-PRINCE, HAITI - The mass exodus has begun.

In buses, boats and cars, thousands of Haitians clutching their meager worldly belongings fled Port-au-Prince on Wednesday.

"Life here is very dangerous," said Jean Josner, 35, who scraped together enough for the bus fare for his wife and three children.

Many of the 2 million people who live in Port-au-Prince originally arrived from the countryside seeking work, and most of those packing the heaving bus depot yesterday were heading home.

"We don't know what will happen if we stay here," said Johnny Jean-Louis, 31, who was leaving with his father and siblings.

The suitcases filled to bursting that lay at their feet contained all they could salvage from their family home, which was destroyed - along with much of the city and most government control - in the Jan. 12 cataclysm.

"If the country changes, we will return. But if not, then we will stay there," Jean-Louis said.

Jean Merurlus, 60, stood marveling at the crowds in the bus station. "They're leaving Port-au-Prince to go to the provinces, but I was born here, so I will stay - I have nowhere else to go," he said.

A powerful aftershock at 6:03a.m. that sent already-traumatized people screaming into the ruined streets helped fuel the stampede.

The aftershock did not cause many casualties, but more buildings fell down. The city's once-majestic cathedral suffered further damage.

"The people were very scared. They cried out, 'Save me! Save me!'" said college student Nicolas Karvy, 24, who was sleeping on a basketball court outside. "I was in the middle of dreaming and I heard the cries."

One woman died of a heart attack, according to undertaker Eddy Thomas, who was wheeling her body along a street. "She had a heart condition, and the new quake finished her," he said.

Search and rescue teams continued scouring crumbled homes and buildings for signs of life. The United Nations said 121 people had been rescued since the quake struck.

Buoying the search came stories of survival so astonishing they were hard to credit.

A newborn baby who had spent more than a third of her life trapped in wreckage with neither nourishment nor care was found alive in her ruined house in the town of Jacmel, south of the capital.

The baby's uncle told France Inter radio that the girl, named Elisabeth, was 23 days old and did not appear wounded. She was taken to an American field hospital.

In places, relief aid was starting to get through to the desperate people.

The U.S. Navy's hospital ship Comfort dropped anchor in view of the capital.

There were other hopeful signals: Trash collectors were attempting to scoop up the mounds of rotting debris in the streets, and markets showed signs of life.

cboyle@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!