This year four hurricanes hit Haiti, leaving 800 dead and a country drowning. Photographer Gideon Mendel waded waist-high through mud to bear witness to an ecological disaster that will only get worse

When four huge storms struck this summer, one after another in the space of 30 days, Haiti never stood a chance. Each time the sky darkened and drops began to fall, it took just hours for torrential downpours to soften hillsides into sludge and send mounds of slick, wet earth crashing into homes. Survivors scrambled on to roofs and watched helplessly as others perished in one of the Caribbean's worst disasters of recent years. The four tropical storms, ending with September's Hurricane Ike, turned Haiti into a wasteland.

Nearly 800 people died, about 60% of the country's harvest was destroyed and entire cities were rendered desolate and uninhabitable. Life in the western hemisphere's poorest country went from grim to desperate.

Weeks later, the floodwaters have receded and the dead are buried, but millions of cubic feet of mud remains, rendering cities such as Gonaives sticky, squelching versions of Pompeii.

Relief agencies such as ActionAid have mobilised to help Haitians salvage and rebuild. But international donors, distracted by the credit crunch, have stumped up less than a third of the UN's requested $108m. At the current rate of clean-up, it will be almost three years before the mud and debris is cleared.

"When there are no longer any dead on the streets, people tend to forget," President Rene Preval recently told reporters. "Attention has shifted to the (US) elections and the sub-prime crisis. These things are important to you, but we ask that you not forget us."

There is little chance that photographer Gideon Mendel will forget. He waded waist-high through Gonaives to capture these images. "Most of the water in the town centre had receded, but the city felt like it was drowning in the residue of thick, stinking mud. Working conditions were some of the most difficult I have ever experienced. The heat was unbearable and the city seemed beyond recovery."

August and September is hurricane season in the Caribbean and other countries such as Cuba and the Dominican Republic were also badly hit by the quadruple whammy. Nature's wrath, some would call it. But the reason Haiti suffered so disproportionately was man-made. A country once thickly wooded has been stripped to less than 2% of tree cover - a shocking denuding compared with neighbouring Dominican Republic, which is 28% forested. This leaves Haiti extremely vulnerable because even light rain can wash away the crumbly topsoil, triggering mudslides and flash floods.

Impoverished families seeking wood for charcoal have driven the deforestation, an environmental calamity compounded by a population boom that has packed 9 million people on to a small half-island. "The real problem with Haiti is too many people. If the same storms had hit in 1900, there would have been far less damage," said David Webster, an anthropology professor at Penn State University.

Other analysts blame the US for pressuring Haiti to open its markets to US food imports, a policy that ruined Haitian agriculture and drove farmers from rural areas into urban slums lacking jobs and infrastructure. Reckless farming and building techniques - with shacks built on precarious hillsides - fuel a vicious circle of poverty and feeble state oversight.

In 2004, tropical storm Jeanne killed an estimated 3,000 people, most in Gonaives, when swollen rivers of rock and mud roared down exposed mountains.

"The whole country is facing an ecological disaster," said the prime minister, Michele Pierre-Louis. "We cannot keep going on like this. We are going to disappear one day. There will not be 400, 500 or 1,000 deaths. There are going to be a million deaths."