On Monday The Lede is continuing to supplement reporting by our colleagues in Haiti on the aftermath of Tuesday’s earthquake by pointing to news and information on the Web. Readers are encouraged to share any first-hand accounts they receive from Haiti or see online in the comments thread below. See the home page of NYTimes.com for the latest news articles and multimedia features on the relief effort. Updates from previous days: Sun. | Sat. | Fri. | Thurs. | Weds. and Tues.

Late on Monday afternoon, Jon Snow of Britain’s Channel 4 News watched as supplies of free drinking water were exhausted in the Nazon district of Port-au-Prince leaving many people in need. His video report, embedded below, shows that drinking water is now a valuable commodity on the black market. Mr. Snow’s report also shows badly injured residents of Port-au-Prince who are still living in makeshift camps without access to medical supplies or treatment, six days after the earthquake struck

The Lede will return on Tuesday to continue following news of the relief effort in Haiti. Until then, please see the home page of NYTimes.com for the latest developments, updated articles and new mulitmedia features. Thanks for your comments and tips.

After responding to critics who questioned the ability of his own foundation to aid the disaster relief effort in Haiti, Wyclef Jean posted this video appeal on his blog on Monday, urging his fans to visit Starbucks and donate to the Red Cross:

Mr. Jean’s appeal also appears on the home page of the Starbucks Web site, along with a news release that says:

In response to the Haitian relief effort, Starbucks today committed support and funding to the growing international relief effort. Starting today, participating Starbucks stores in the U.S. and Canada will enable customers to make monetary donations at store registers, with no purchase necessary, to benefit the American and Canadian Red Cross organizations for a limited time. The Starbucks Foundation will also donate $1 million from The Starbucks Foundation to the American Red Cross efforts to help Haiti. […] In addition, Haitian-American musician Wyclef Jean has collaborated with Starbucks to make an appeal to the Global Community about the crucial needs of the Haitian community. To learn more about Jean’s ongoing efforts in Haiti, go to www.yele.org.

According to an update on the Web site of Catholic Relief Services, “The recent earthquake that devastated Haiti also destroyed much of St. Francois de Salle Hospital,” in Port-au-Prince. Lane Hartill, an information officer for the charity writes that, “about 70% of the hospital has been destroyed.” Despite this, the charity reports that it has gotten some medical supplies to the hospital and on Sunday “doctors there performed their first operation – an amputation – since the earthquake using a building that was still habitable.”

Michael Hill, a press officer, adds that Catholic Relief Services “had a staff of over 300 in Haiti before the earthquake – all survived.”

Here is another glimpse of the devastation in Jacmel, on Haiti’s southern coast, from the film students at the town’s Ciné Institute — be warned, the report contains graphic images of dead bodies:

According to Zidor Fednal, the Jacmel official cited in the film, an examination of 1,779 houses there found that 1,200 had been destroyed, not counting those that had cracks caused by the earthquake. The same official said that surrounding areas had been “completely devastated.”

From Port-au-Prince, my colleague Simon Romero reports:

As foreign groups slowly began the task of distributing aid to many thousands of desperate people living in the streets, a challenge emerged to the return of a functioning economy on Monday as business owners refrained from opening their doors due to a fear of mobs attempting to ransack their operations and steal their products. “I have 450 employees who I would like to get working again, but I’m afraid of being attacked when word on the street gets out that we have water,” said Roger Parisot, 48, one of the owners of Sotresa, a company in the Portail Leogane district that sells purified water in small plastic pouches. Mr. Parisot explained that another obstacle to restarting operations came in the form of the continued lack of electricity service here. Fuel distributors were hesitant to drive their trucks through the city with diesel and gasoline out of concern that people could mob them in attempts to get fuel for portable generators, he said. “We need American troops here to instill order immediately, or no bank, no company, will reopen its doors,” Mr. Parisot said in an interview. “Right now there is no way we can get the things of life, food or water, to those who need them.”

On Monday, Jonathan Rugman of Britain’s Channel 4 News visited Petit-Goâve, a town about 40 miles west of Port-au-Prince, which was very badly damaged by the earthquake. Mr. Rugman’s report, which contains distressing images, shows a town where “there are no rescue teams, there’s no foreign aid, but everywhere the overpowering smell of the dead.” As attention turns, slowly, to how the disaster affected areas outside of Port-au-Prince, the United Nations mission in Haiti posted this video online, showing conditions in Léogane, a city of more than 50,000 people, 20 miles west of the capital:

On Monday José de Córdoba and Charles Forelle of the Wall Street Journal reported from Léogane that “Hilda Alcindor, dean of the nursing school here, has seen 5,000 patients since Tuesday’s quake.” They added:

Léogane’s police chief, Alain Auguste, says that almost 80% of the town has been destroyed, and that there are at least 10,000 dead. Authorities say they have buried about 1,300 — about 800 in mass graves. Mr. Auguste says Léogane has no heavy equipment like bulldozers or cranes to lift rubble and get to the bodies. “The city is completely destroyed. We have nothing. We work with our hands,” he said. Léogane has practically no communication with national authorities in Port-au-Prince, where most of the aid is arriving. To plead the city’s case, the mayor drove to the capital Saturday. The campus of the nursing college has been turned into a tent city where hundreds of survivors who have lost their houses, or are afraid to sleep in them because of recurring aftershocks, strung sheets between shaved branches of trees under a sweltering sun. “I need antibiotics, I need pain medicine, I need anti-tetanus shots,” says Ms. Alcindor. She fears an outbreak of infection from the filthy conditions. “Those legs we treated Tuesday, they are falling apart,” she says, standing in the middle of the refugee camp.



View Larger Map

My colleague Neil MacFarquhar reports from the United Nations in New York on a briefing by Alain Le Roy, who oversees peacekeeping operations, and Susana Malcorra, who is in charge of support for field operations:

On the death toll, Alain Le Roy said he could not confirm the 200,000 figure and that the U.N. defers to the Red Cross on this matter. He said as far as he knows they have not gone beyond the 50,000 mark and at this point it is still impossible to tell. “I don’t think anybody knows to be frank,” he said. On U.N.-U.S. tensions, Susana Malcorra said there had been coordination problems immediately after the U.S. took over the airport, with priority given to American planes and some U.N. flights — including World Food Program flights packed with food — diverted. But she said since then a special coordination team was set up at the airport itself so that they could talk directly too each other about what was on what planes and that seems to have effectively addressed the issue.

Here is video, from The Associated Press, of former President Bill Clinton in Port-au-Prince om Monday, discussing problems with the distribution of aid:

A few minutes ago Carel Pedre, a Haitian radio DJ who had previously called the visit to Haiti on Saturday by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Haiti a “wake up call” for the Haitian government wrote on Twitter:

Mr Clinton Was Not So Happy About The Situation! 2nd wake up call!

Some good news to report from Jacmel. Andrew Bigosinski, an editing teacher at the film school there, writes on Monday afternoon that the only student of the Ciné Institute who was feared dead, Rose Laure Charles, has been found alive. “She is well and we have accounted for all our students,” Mr. Bigosinski says. “We are thrilled and relieved and continue to work towards reporting the disaster through the eyes of our students. Thank you all for your support and concern.”

On Sunday, David Belle, the director of the Ciné Institute — the film school in Jacmel that has produced a series of remarkable reports on the devastation to that city of 40,000 on Haiti’s south coast — warned the American media not to fixate on reports of violence in Haiti. In a post on the school’s Web site, Mr. Belle wrote from Port-au-Prince:

I have been told that much U.S. media coverage paints Haiti as a tinderbox ready to explode. I’m told that lead stories in major media are of looting, violence and chaos. There could be nothing further from the truth. I have traveled the entire city daily since my arrival. The extent of damages is absolutely staggering. At every step, at every bend is one horrific tragedy after another; homes, businesses, schools and churches leveled to nothing. Inside every mountain of rubble there are people, most dead at this point. The smell is overwhelming. On every street are people — survivors — who have lost everything they have: homes, parents, children, friends. NOT ONCE have we witnessed a single act of aggression or violence. To the contrary, we have witnessed neighbors helping neighbors and friends helping friends and strangers. We’ve seen neighbors digging in rubble with their bare hands to find survivors. We’ve seen traditional healers treating the injured; we’ve seen dignified ceremonies for mass burials and residents patiently waiting under boiling sun with nothing but their few remaining belongings. A crippled city of two million awaits help, medicine, food and water. Most haven’t received any. Haiti can be proud of its survivors. Their dignity and decency in the face of this tragedy is itself staggering.

Last Thursday, after arriving in Port-au-Prince from New York, Mr. Belle described the unbearable conditions the city’s residents were forced to endure:

Periodic roadblocks have been set up by residents, protesting the lack of any aid presence and angry at stench and indecency. Huge state-owned caterpillar tractors and dump trucks were just beginning to arrive and load bodies as we passed through. In the worst parts — every 50 feet or so — there were groups of 10 to 15 bodies lined side by side or stacked together. In between these stacks and groupings is a continual line of singles and doubles — one body after another. The odor is overwhelming. No one sleeps indoors and so roads are also partially blocked with families who have moved their beds to the street.

Early on Monday morning, Richard Morse, the Haitian musician and manager of the Olaffson Hotel in Port-au-Prince, wrote on Twitter of the horrible spectacle of roads blocked by dead bodies in parts of the city:

Blocking roads with bodies is what it sometimes takes to get help. They’re not doing it 4 aesthetic reasons.

As most of the attention remains focused on the terrible suffering in Port-au-Prince, there is less information about some other Haitian towns that were also badly damaged by the earthquake. This morning on Twitter Richard Morse wrote, “Some journalists may be spreading out and heading out of the city to get a look at other areas. I’m very concerned about Jacmel and Leogane.”

As The Lede noted on Saturday, a group of film students at the Ciné Institute in Jacmel have been producing short video reports on the catastrophic effects of the earthquake in that city of 40,000 on Haiti’s southern coast.

Ciné Institute

Embedded below are three more extraordinary reports from the students in Jacmel. Be warned that both reports contain graphic and very disturbing images of badly wounded or dead people.

This report, on the formation of a community group in Jacmel to help clear the streets of dead bodies, was published on the school’s Web site on Sunday:

This report, uploaded to the video-sharing site Vimeo by the students on Monday, shows some of the badly wounded survivors of the earthquake in the city:

This report, uploaded just 40 minutes ago to Vimeo, includes some footage used in the previous report — and a very disturbing image of a dead body in a badly damaged school:

My colleague Ginger Thompson reports from a bus station in Port-au-Prince that some residents of the city are heading out of town:

Bus terminal number one has been bustling like never before, according to Dieumetra Sainmerita, who manages the station’s traffic. He said the cost of bus tickets have risen 20 percent since last week. And people are selling whatever they have left of any value to buy them. “First there were the people who lost there houses,” he said of the passengers. “Then there were people who lost relatives. Now the people I see they are afraid of the thieves trying to steal from them in the night.” Thieves were also on the prowl at the station. Marceson Romen said two men tried to make off with his suitcase, but fled when they saw police. Mr. Romen was on his way to his native Artibone. The 27-year old plumber had left his hometown years ago to go to high school and make a good life for himself. But after pulling his three children out of the rubble that was once their home, he packed them up and hopes to build them a place on the property once occupied by his parents. “I thought one day I would go home a rich man,” he said, carrying one black suitcase and a bar if Irish Spring in his shirt pocket. “Instead I am going back with nothing.” When asked where they were headed, many passengers pointed and said, “The Big North,” which covers Gonaives, Port de Paix, St. Mark, Veret and Cap Haitian.

On Saturday, Donna Brazile, the Democratic political strategist and New Orleans native, wrote on Twitter:

Haitians are survivors & have always been a resilient people. It is wrong to focus on the small group of looters or rioters. Haiti has a long and rich history of contributing to the world. Haiti may be poor economically, but it is rich in history and courage.

In an essay on American media coverage of the situation in Haiti, Natalie Hopkinson asks, “When Are Haitians Looters and When Are They Just Hungry?” As Ms. Hopkinson reminds us, in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina nearly identical photographs moved across the news wires of a black man and a white woman carrying food taken from local stores, with quite different captions: the young black man was described as walking “through chest deep floodwater after looting a grocery store,” while the white woman was said to “wade through chest-deep water after finding bread and soda from a local grocery store.”

As she follows news coverage of survivors struggling through the aftermath of the natural disaster in Port-au-Prince, Ms. Hopkinson says:

I don’t know what is more troubling: That so many observers, including political strategist and New Orleans native Donna Brazile, have been drawing facile parallels between the two cities. Or that so many of those comparisons are turning out to be true.

Former President Bill Clinton arrived in Haiti on Monday afternoon. Here is video of Mr. Clinton at the airport in Port-au-Prince from The Associated Press:

According to the French news agency AFP, Mr. Clinton is there “to deliver relief supplies and get a first-hand look at conditions in the quake crippled country.” The news agency also said that Mr. Clinton’s foundation released a statement from Mr. Clinton in which he said:

Clinton, who is both the UN special envoy to Haiti and a coordinator with fellow former president George W. Bush of a US campaign to raise funds for Haiti, was to meet with Haitian leaders and survivors.

As U.N. special envoy for Haiti, I feel a deep obligation to the Haitian people to visit the country and meet with President Préval to ensure our response continues to be coordinated and effective.

Frederic Dupoux in Port-au-Prince writes on Twitter:

Medlab in petion-ville needs night nurses ! Please send some help. French hospital is now open and ready to receive the wounded at the french lycee in rue marcadieux bourdon

A review of French press coverage of the disaster on the English-language Web site of Radio France Internationale notes:

Le Monde’s front page is given over to an interview with the Haitian novelist, Dany Laferrière, who was in Port-au-Prince at the moment of the earthquake. He wants people to stop talking about Haiti as if it was cursed, suggesting that the island’s population was, in some sense, being punished for a past crime. And he wonders about the identification of those who took food from destroyed shops as “looters”, saying that, when people risk their lives, crawling through ruins in search of something to eat and drink, they are motivated by need, not by greed.

The Guardian’s Lizzy Davis points out that the writer said the use of the term “cursed” was unfair: “This is an insulting word which implies that Haiti has done something wrong and it’s paying for it.” According to a translation by Ms. Davis, he added:

It would be better to talk about this incredible energy that I’ve seen, these men and women who are helping each other with courage and dignity. Although the city has been partially destroyed and the state has been decapitated, the people are staying, working and living. So please, stop using the word curse. Haiti has done nothing… This is a catastrophe which could happen anywhere.

French-speakers — or those willing to trust Google Translate for a rough idea of what was said — can read the complete interview with Mr. Laferrière on Le Monde’s Web site.

On Friday, Mr. Laferrière told Canada’s Globe and Mail newspaper: “It felt unreal. Because it was too much. This time it felt like something that surpassed all the misfortune that has stricken Haiti until now.” He added, “This time, we hit the bottom.”

Peter Walker and Mark Tran, who are live-blogging the relief effort in Haiti for The Guardian, draw our attention to this video — which a description on a U.S. Navy YouTube channel says was shot on Sunday as the crew of a Navy helicopter flew a child described as “an American citizen” from Port-au-Prince to the aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson for medical care:

Reporting for The Times, Christine Negroni writes:

Immigration officials at the West Palm Beach airport seized a two year old Haitian child being brought into the United States for medical treatment on Saturday. The child, Mishna Prezille, was flown to Florida on a private plane operated by Air Mobile Ministries, a missionary group, and was in the custody of two journalists who volunteer with the charity. She was to be put into the care of a Florida physician, but immigration officers told the group when they arrived that the child had an illegal visa, according to John Torres, a newspaper reporter with Florida Today, who was on the flight and wrote about it on Monday. Marlin Moudy, the pilot who regularly works for the Florida-based charity, flew the plane into West Palm Beach International Airport. He said he examined the visa before departing Haiti. Mr. Moudy said the document he examined was a one year visa issued on August 16, 2009. “She was screaming and hollering when they took her,” Mr. Moudy said, calling the atmosphere at the airport traumatic when federal authorities separated Mishna from her chaperon, Marci Gonzalez a Florida television reporter. “They put her in a big SUV and took her away and she was crying.” Mishna was on her way to the home of Dr. Stephen Badolato, who says he has power of attorney to provide for the medical care of the child. He volunteers medical treatment to the Ruuska Village orphanage in Bon Repos, Haiti. Dr. Badolato said the power of attorney was with him at his home, not with the child. “It’s horrible. I’ve been up all night working on trying to get her back,” Dr. Badolato said. An official at the Department of Homeland Security said the problem was not with the child’s visa but the authorization for her guardianship. “There was no proof of guardianship. He didn’t have the documentation in terms of guardianship,” the official said of Dr. Badolato’s authorization. Reached in Haiti Sunday, Joe Hurston of Air Mobile relief said Mishna had surgery in the United States last summer and was in Haiti to visit her mother before returning to the U.S. for more medical treatment. She was at the orphanage at the time of the earthquake. “This is a 2-year old girl with club feet. We had two journalists in the plane and another American Airlines captain and they were all held in the airport for 7 hours while being interrogated,” said Mr. Huston. A Homeland Security official said the department is generally concerned that children entering the country “are placed with the proper people.”

Samuel Dalembert, a Haitian basketball player with the Philadelphia 76ers, “will present a check for $100,000 as his initial contribution to Haiti Earthquake Relief,” during a game on Friday, according to a statement by his foundation. The statement continues, “Samuel has also pledged to match any donations made by fans during the game. Representatives from Samuel’s charitable partner UNICEF will also be present to detail the efforts on the ground in Haiti in response to the tragedy. Please consider making your own donation today.” Mr. Dalembert also worked with UNICEF to help in the relief effort after a series of deadly hurricanes struck Haiti in 2008.

As Haitians wait for aid to reach them, on what local bloggers are calling “Haiti Year Zero, Day 6,” some observers are asking if it is fair to call people who take goods from ruined shops “looters.”

This video posted online by The Associated Press on Monday shows Haitian police firing in the air to disperse young men carrying goods from destroyed buildings in Port-au-Prince:

Looking at video of a similar scene on Sunday, Lt. Gen. Russel L. Honoré, retired, who took charge of security in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, told CNN: “These people are trying to survive, and you should not shoot someone over trying to get food – they are [doing] nothing but expressing a human need to get food.” He added, “The president of Haiti needs to declare right now, if we’re gonna make this a better place, that no one will be shot for trying to get food.”

On Sunday, TV Globo in Brazil broadcast video shot by a Brazilian peacekeeper in Port-au-Prince on Tuesday just moments after the earthquake struck. The footage, in the report below, shows the ruined Sacré Coeur de Tugeau. According to TV Globo, Zilda Arns, a Catholic relief worker who had been compared to Mother Teresa for her work on behalf of children, was killed in the church.

On Wednesday, The Christian Science Monitor explained:

Zilda Arns was in Haiti to support the local volunteers of the Pastoral da Criança (Children’s Pastoral), a group she founded in southern Brazil in 1983. The group teaches uneducated mothers the importance of healthcare issues such as breast feeding, vaccinations and proper hydration, and then instructs them how to pass on that knowledge to friends and neighbors in Brazil’s most impoverished communities. Today, the Pastoral is one of Brazil’s most respected organisations and Arns was one of the nation’s best-known faces.

In an obituary for Ms. Arns in The Guardian, Tom Phillips wrote:

A devout Catholic, she was known for her grassroots methodology which saw her group send doctors to train local women in basic healthcare techniques which they could then spread through their neighbourhoods. She championed education, rather than charity, as the best way of tackling deprivation and frequently toured the country to meet with young mothers. Her work took her from the urban favelas of southern Brazil to the remote indigenous and riverside communities of the Amazon rainforest. […] In her final speech, given in Haiti last Tuesday, Arns reportedly told her audience: “Just like birds, who care for their little ones, building nests high up in the trees or mountains, far away from the reach of predators, and closer to God, so too must we take care of our children… promoting and respecting their rights and protecting them.”

Brazil has played a large role in the peacekeeping operation in Haiti and TV Globo reported on Sunday that at least 18 Brazilians died as a result of the earthquake.

On Monday in Port-au-Prince Lt. Gen. P.K. “Ken” Keen, deputy commander of U.S. Southern Command, told the media that, despite reports of violence that may have been amplified in the press and online, there appears to be less violence on Haiti’s streets now than there was before the earthquake:

As Politico reported on Sunday, “Keen was actually in Port-au-Prince, Haiti’s capital, when Tuesday’s earthquake struck. Two of Keen’s aides were seriously injured and have been sent back to the United States for medical treatment, while another remains missing.”

A reader draws our attention to this video report from the CBS News program “60 Minutes,” which was broadcast on Sunday and shows that among the buildings flattened by the earthquake were some housing important Haitian government ministries:

Watch CBS News Videos Online

Complaints about the response of Haiti’s government were echoed early on Monday morning by Richard Morse, a Haitian-American musician who runs the Hotel Oloffson in Port-au-Prince, where many international journalists are now staying. Since soon after the earthquake struck, Mr. Morse has used his Twitter feed — @RAMhaiti — to provide a stream of updates and commentary on the response of Haitians.

Late last night, after a temporary absence from the social network apparently caused by a lack of fuel for the hotel’s generators, Mr. Morse wrote, at about midnight:

I’m back… took time to find gas for the generator… journalists were freaking out.

About an hour later he wrote: “I don’t sense a government presence in all of this.”

He also discussed the fact that a concern with security by members of the U.N. mission makes them wary of going into parts of Port-au-Prince designated as the “red zone,” including the neighborhood his hotel is located in. He wrote that “a journalist receiving a ride from a U.N. vehicle was dropped off” some distance from it and told that the peacekeepers were “prohibited” from going to that area of town. In a series of outraged messages, Mr. Morse wrote:

The Oloffson is “RED ZONE” How can the UN help the people of Carrefour Feuille if they are prohibited from coming to the neighborhood!! If the UN can’t help poor people then what are they doing in Haiti!!! The UN has odd politics about where they go and what they do. They ignored the corruption during both elections last year. I went to the so called Red Zone on foot with the CBS crew so they could get a close up look at the destruction; smell the bodies If the UN can’t go to where THE PEOPLE need their help then what are they doing here? If the UN can’t gain the trust of the Haitians after four years then what are they doing here? Carrefour Feuille is a zone of destruction The fact that I haven’t seen an international presence in this area tell me that others are following the lead of the UN The UN not permitted in this neighborhood. I have so many journalist here they sleep on the lawn. None of them are armed!!! Safe? Violence is at as minimum considering the current state of desperation, hunger, thirst, lack of medical attention.

Despite complaints from Haitians that the country’s president, René Préval, has not responded well to the catastrophe, on Sunday in Port-au-Prince, Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, told Haitians that the relief effort would proceed “under the leadership of the government of Haiti.” Here is video of Mr. Ban’s remarks:

Reuters reports that the American military plans to send thousands of marines to join the relief effort in Haiti:

The U.S. Southern Command said some 2,200 Marines with heavy equipment to clear debris, medical aid and helicopters, would join some 5,000 U.S. troops already in the region.

Given the complicated role America has played in Haiti in the past, experts on the region are asking “whether the United States will maintain a muscular role in the reconstruction of Haiti once the news cameras go home,” my colleagues Helene Cooper and Mark Landler report.

In Monday’s New Yorker, George Packer writes that “beyond rescue and relief lies the harder task of figuring out what the United States and other countries can and ought to do for Haiti over the long term, and what Haiti is capable of doing for itself.”

Mr. Packer adds:

Haitian political culture has a long history of insularity, corruption, and violence, which partly explains why Port-au-Prince lies in ruins. If, after an earthquake that devastated rich and poor neighborhoods alike, Haiti’s political and business élites resurrect the old way of fratricidal self-seeking, they will find nothing but debris for spoils. Disasters on this scale reveal something about the character of the societies in which they occur. The aftermath of the 2008 cyclone in Burma not only betrayed the callous indifference of the ruling junta but demonstrated the vibrancy of civil society there. Haiti’s earthquake shows that, whatever the communal spirit of its people at the moment of crisis, the government was not functioning, unable even to bury the dead, much less rescue the living. This vacuum, which had been temporarily filled by the U.N., now poses the threat of chaos. But if Haiti is to change, the involvement of outside countries must also change. Rather than administering aid almost entirely through the slow drip of private organizations, international agencies and foreign powers should put their money and their effort into the more ambitious project of building a functional Haitian state. It would be the work of years, and billions of dollars. If this isn’t a burden that nations want to take on, so be it. But to patch up a dying country and call it a rescue would leave Haiti forsaken indeed, and not by God.

While relief workers scramble to get aid to desperate Haitians in the earthquake zone, tourism, improbably, continues at a resort in the country just 85 miles away from Port-au-Prince. The Guardian reported on Sunday:

The 4,370-berth Independence of the Seas, owned by Royal Caribbean International, disembarked at the heavily guarded resort of Labadee on the north coast on Friday; a second cruise ship, the 3,100-passenger Navigator of the Seas is due to dock. The Florida cruise company leases a picturesque wooded peninsula and its five pristine beaches from the government for passengers to “cut loose” with watersports, barbecues, and shopping for trinkets at a craft market before returning on board before dusk. Safety is guaranteed by armed guards at the gate. The decision to go ahead with the visit has divided passengers. The ships carry some food aid, and the cruise line has pledged to donate all proceeds from the visit to help stricken Haitians. But many passengers will stay aboard when they dock; one said he was “sickened.”

According to a spokeswoman for Royal Caribbean quoted by The Miami Herald, passengers on the Independence “gave a standing ovation” when they heard that the cruise ship was bringing emergency food supplies with the tourists to Labadee.

The Herald reports that the cruise line plans to continue to visits to the private beach: “Other ships set to carry supplies to Labadee include Navigator of the Seas, set to arrive Monday, Jan. 18; Liberty of the Seas, slated for Tuesday, Jan. 19; and Celebrity Soltice, scheduled for Friday Jan. 22.”

As The Lede noted on Wednesday, the cruise line has been criticized in the past for not always being clear about the fact that Labadee is part of Haiti, and frequently describes it as being located “on the north coast of Hispaniola.”

Here is a promotional video for Labadee posted on YouTube last year that does identify it as a beach in Haiti, but also pictures it as quite removed from the suffering so common in the rest of the country:

The Haitian photographer Frederic Dupoux confirms that some gas stations are open in Port-au-Prince, writing on Twitter:

Traffic is nothing like before. It seems that most of the gaz station are open and causing that traffic

He also uploaded this image of the traffic, apparently from his mobile phone, to his TweetPhoto page:

Frederic Dupoux

From Port-au-Prince on Monday, Ed Pilkington of The Guardian reports on Twitter:

American embassy tells us it comes as helpers not occupiers in #Haiti. Out we go to find out what that means sign in road in #Haiti: we need food, we need water, help us [have] just seen guy in #Haiti wearing Uncle Sam hat sitting in rubble. Surreal first sign of rebuilding in #Haiti – two men rebuilding a wall outside a factory some of most tense scenes in #Haiti r in petrol stations, hundreds jostling to fill their cans Crowd squabbling in the street in #Haiti over blue plastic sheets – i.e. homes cos they make tents finally bulldozers out clearing rubble in #Haiti – but only at official buildings

On Sunday, as my colleagues Ginger Thompson and Neil MacFarquhar reported, just after the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, visited the site of the destroyed headquarters of the U.N. mission in Haiti rescue workers pulled Jens Kristensen, a Danish civilian employee, from underneath giant slabs of stone. Here is video from the U.N. of that rescue by experts from Brazil and the United States:

There were also other rescues in Port-au-Prince on Sunday. As my colleagues Damien Cave and Deborah Sontag reported, a 7-year-old girl who survived more than four days eating dried fruit rolls in the collapsed Caribbean Supermarket was pulled from the rubble in the city’s Delmas neighborhood.

This report from Monday’s CBS News Early Show includes footage of an 18-year-old woman who was rescued from a collapsed hotel on Sunday by a search and rescue team from Los Angeles: