Fights broke out as crowds of people scrambled to collect rolls of fabric, sauce pans and other items that were tossed into the streets. In some cases, men pulled out knives or brandished chunks of wood to try to disperse the crowds and take the loot for themselves. Guns were fired.

Despite being greatly outnumbered, small bands of police officers ventured into the fray. In the afternoon, as gangs were ravaging Boulevard Dessalines, a small group of officers arrived in a pickup truck. “Go away from this place,” Officer Gaston Romuald told a passer-by, grasping a handgun and pointing at groups of young men wielding wooden planks, machetes and bottles of Rhum Bakara. “It is already bad and getting worse.”

With that, he took his baton and, with the help of a plainclothes officer carrying an assault rifle, dispersed a group of looters. Some in the crowd wore bandanas over their faces, shielding their identities from the policemen and their noses from the smell of rotting corpses.

Photo

Down the street, outside Mik-Nik, a small general store, a man emerged wild-eyed with a pair of shoes still in their box.

“There is good pillaging here,” he said with a smile. Then he ran away.

The looting took place a few blocks from the Civil Prison, which had collapsed in the quake, freeing all the inmates who were not killed. But no one could answer with certainty on Saturday whether the men with machetes were among the dozens who escaped.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“We are all in a bad way,” said Margaret Cherubin, 41, a merchant who lost her husband, Jimmy, and three children in the earthquake. She said she was afraid to return to work because of her fear of thieves. “I have no family, just the clothing on my back,” she said. “I now live with God only.”

There were also reports of attacks on aid deliveries. Fred Lavaud, who works on the security detail of Haiti’s president, René Préval, described scenes of women who were assaulted after receiving food. “The problem is there’s no control,” he said. “And people are desperate.”

An official with the World Food Program said that aid trucks were traveling through the city under armed guard and that security had been added at food-distribution locations. “You’re dizzy after an event like this,” said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. “You’re full of loss. For the moment, the population is rather quiet. But we are seeing the first signs of violence and looting.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The response to it was just as quick and angry. Word traveled fast that parts of the city should be avoided.

“There are thefts everywhere,” said Joel Querette, 23, a college student camped out at a park near the airport. “People have guns and knives, and they are stealing and looting the stores.”

As night fell, the police brought a man to Pétionville in the back of a pickup and informed a gathering crowd that he had been caught looting in another neighborhood, witnesses said. While the police officers stood by, an angry mob pulled the man from the truck.

The mob stripped the accused looter, then began beating him. They dragged him up the street while pummeling him, then threw him on a trash heap, where he lay vomiting and bleeding.

One man began piling trash on top of him and set it on fire. As the firelight flickered on an art gallery and a church on opposite sides of the street, dozens gathered to watch the man burn to death.