At Haiti roadblock, a lesson in power dynamics

Frustrated by the dumping of bodies in their area near the capital, young men block traffic on a key road. The plot swells with angry drivers, bribes, U.N. troops and even U.S. choppers.

"There were only three people who died in this area," shouted Pierre Maxim, 21. "The next day we wake up and see bodies all over."

They were sick of people from the earthquake-wrecked capital dumping the dead on their streets in the middle of the night.

The young men of the Carrefour suburb of Port-au-Prince then furiously interrogated drivers Saturday about what they were carrying in their cars.

Reporting from Carrefour, Haiti — They built the roadblock across the highway out of whatever they could find -- burning tires, the shell of a refrigerator, a rusty bed frame, a palm tree stump, a beaten-up camper shell and eight bodies, one in a makeshift coffin, another stuffed into a suitcase.

Roadblocks are common in Haiti, ranging in mood from tense civil disobedience to outright violence.

Saturday's played out over two hours in a way that demonstrated, in almost perfect form, the dynamics of power in the country and even highlighted Haitians' troubled love of Americans.

On a hot and cloudless morning, diesel exhaust and a fine cement powder cast a gray haze over the rutted strip of Route 2, a crucial artery out of Port-au-Prince lined by crumbling cinder-block storefronts.

Patron Wilfrenz, 28, said the young men who set up the roadblock were part of the "local brigade," which protects the neighborhood in the absence of any meaningful law enforcement presence.

Such groups, under a variety of names and with varying amounts of weaponry, were empowered by populist former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. They are seen as either freedom fighters or street gangs, depending on one's point of view.

They have repeatedly shut down the country, most notably during the events leading up to Aristide's ouster in 2004 and the subsequent election in 2006. Although they have been quiet lately, no one believes that they cannot mobilize in an instant.

On Saturday, about 20 of the young men, with more than a hundred others watching, became gatekeepers to the entire southern part of the country.

Around 9 a.m., a contingent of United Nations peacekeepers prepared to break up the roadblock. The Sri Lankan soldiers, based in the nearby rural town of Leogane, pulled their trucks right up to the barrier of corpses and junk. Eight of the blue helmets, armed with assault rifles, got out and screamed back and forth with the unarmed men about removing it.

Drivers on both sides of the roadblock agreed with the peacekeepers. "Let it through!" shouted a man driving a truck. Someone dragged away the camper shell. Another man ran up and shoved it back. "Block it off!" he yelled.

The eight soldiers moved in with their rifles about 9:30 a.m., barking and gesturing to get the roadblock out of the way. They eventually kicked the camper shell aside, and a few cars and U.N. vehicles got through.