January 17, 2010 4:33 PM

The province and the Office of Emergency Management are working in close collaboration with the federal government, other provinces and territories, and international aid agencies to co-ordinate the Canadian humanitarian response to Haiti."Immediately following the massive earthquake that caused destruction in Port au Prince on Jan. 12, Nova Scotia offered assistance and resources to the Canadian relief effort," said Ramona Jennex, Minister responsible for Emergency Management."Nova Scotia stands ready to further respond."Already, Nova Scotia has contributed $100,000 to the relief effort. The Department of Health is working with districts to compile and inventory vailable medical supplies, should they be needed. In addition, Nova Scotia is working with the federal government to bring Canadian citizens, who were in Haiti when the earthquake struck, home.To date, no Canadians in Haiti have indicated that they are returning to Nova Scotia. However, EMO, the departments of Community Services and Health, as well as the Red Cross and the Canadian Military, have co-ordinated plans to appropriately respond to the needs of any returning Nova Scotians. Nova Scotia has also offered assistance to the Quebec government, as Montreal is the entry point for returning Canadians.The federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade is leading the Canadian response in Haiti. Aid to Haiti must be co-ordinated with the international aid effort to ensure that resources can be transported into the country and that the aid offered assists, not impedes, the response. Conditions at the Port au Prince International Airport remain congested, increasing the need to carefully co-ordinate the transport of personnel and resource into Haiti."The federal government is working with the international community to determine what additional resources are required and to co-ordinate moving those resources into Haiti," said Ms. Jennex. "As soon as any additional assistance is needed from Nova Scotia, we will rapidly respond."Officials at the Emergency Management Office are in constant contact with the federal government, Public Safety Canada, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, the provinces and territories and the Red Cross. The Nova Scotia Joint Emergency Operations Centre is actively monitoring the situation and responding to any federal requests for assistance."Nova Scotians are caring people, who have already made significant financial contributions to the relief effort," said Ms. Jennex. "It is expected that the recovery in Haiti will be a long and ongoing process. Nova Scotia will continue to be actively engaged in the response.”The Canadian government is matching donations to registered charities providing aid to Haiti up to a total of $50 million. For additional information on making a donation to a registered aid agency, please visit: www.canadainternational.gc.ca/haiti , click Earthquake in Haiti, then How Canadians Can Help.FOR BROADCAST USE:The province and the Office of Emergency Management areworking in close collaboration with the federal government, otherprovinces and territories, and international aid agencies toco-ordinate the Canadian humanitarian response to Haiti.Ramona Jennex, Minister responsible for EmergencyManagement says after the massive earthquake that causeddestruction in Port au Prince on January 12, Nova Scotia offeredassistance and resources to the Canadian relief effort. She saysNova Scotia stands ready to further respond.Already, Nova Scotia has contributed 100-thousand dollars tothe relief effort. The Department of Health is working withdistricts to compile and inventory available medical supplies,should they be needed. In addition, Nova Scotia is working withthe federal government to bring Canadian citizens, who were inHaiti when the earthquake struck, home.-30-Media Contact: Michelle PerryEmergency Management OfficeCell: 902-220-7956E-mail:perrymx@gov.ns.ca