At a collapsed Caribbean Supermarket where search teams from Florida and New York City worked, rescuers late Sunday pulled two survivors from what had been its fourth floor. Officials said both were in stable condition, able to survive for so long by eating food trapped along with them. Earlier in the day, a policeman reported three other people had been rescued from the rubble.

Crews had located the pair on Sunday afternoon and worked to get them out, NBC's Kerry Sanders reported from the scene.

One official coordinating the rescue efforts there told Sanders that a text message believed sent from under the rubble indicated that "more than 60" people were alive there.Officials later said that number was probably a mistake.

The supermarket's manager, Samer Tahmoush, estimated that there would have been around 75 to 100 shoppers inside the market in the Delmas neighborhood when the quake hit.

The supermarket, one of the biggest in Port-au-Prince, had completely collapsed on itself, its upper layers falling on those below like a squeezed concertina.

Crushed supermarket trolleys were visible between the sandwiched layers of concrete. Also visible were green and orange supermarket shelving and scattered debris and wares like tea bags, cat food, kitchenware, electronic goods and children's toys, toilet rolls and bathroom sponges.

"We've had to cut through three floors from above, we've been digging through concrete floors, shelving, food, and everything else you would find in a supermarket," said Jose Mendia from the FEMA Florida rescue team.

"It's a really consolidated collapse, what we call a pancake collapse," he added.

"The best time to get somebody back is within 96 hours, but if they have access to food and water, they could survive longer," he said. It was believed that some of those trapped deep inside might be able to reach food and water near them.

Tahmoush said many of his staff had managed to run out fast enough and escape being buried. Many others too had been pulled out quickly from the rubble by rescuers.

But Tahmoush said he knew that a number of his employees — cashiers and bag packers — were buried under the wreckage.

U.N. staffer, hotel co-owner rescued

In another rescue, a Danish U.N. employee was freed from the destroyed headquarters on Sunday. He was talking and given water before being rushed off for medical treatment. He was found just 15 minutes after U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon visited the scene.

And the co-owner of the Hotel Montana was pulled out from under the rubble of what had been a luxury hotel. Nadine Cardoso was dehydrated but otherwise uninjured.

"It's a little miracle," said Reinhard Riedl, her husband. "She's one tough cookie. She is indestructible."

Twelve hours after the rescue effort began, with more than 20 friends and relatives of the prominent community member watching early Sunday, Cardoso was lowered from a hill of debris on a stretcher.

The rescue was bittersweet for Cardoso's sister, because rescuers also told Gerthe Cardoso they had to abandon a search for her 7-year-old grandson when an aftershock closed a space where he was believed to be.

Teams save more than 70

U.N. humanitarian spokeswoman Elisabeth Byrs said 1,739 rescue workers in 43 teams with 161 dogs and high-tech equipment so far have saved more than 70 people.

The U.N. itself lost at least 40 staff — including its mission chief Hedi Annabi — with hundreds still missing. "For the United Nations, this is the gravest and greatest single loss in the history of our organization," Ban said.

He added that the U.N. was already feeding 40,000 and hopes to feed 2 million within a month.



For many others, though, the five days since the magnitude-7.0 quake hit have turned into an aching wait for the food, water and medical care slowly making its way from an overwhelmed airport rife with political squabbles. And while aid is reaching the country, growing impatience among the suffering has spawned some violence.

Rescuers search part of the 5-story Carib Market on Sunday.

Nobody knows how many died in Tuesday's quake. Haiti's government alone has already recovered 20,000 bodies — not counting those recovered by independent agencies or relatives themselves, Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive said.

The Pan American Health Organization now says 50,000 to 100,000 people perished in the quake. Bellerive said 100,000 would "seem to be the minimum."

Byrs declared the quake the worst disaster the U.N. has ever faced, since so much government and U.N. capacity in the country was demolished. In that way, Byrs said in Geneva, it's worse than the cataclysmic Asian tsunami of 2004: "Everything is damaged."

Two suspected looters found dead

Amid the struggle for food, some turned to looting, infuriating people struggling to guard what little they still have.

Gunfire crackled in the streets as police battled suspected looters in parts of the city. Officers were seen hurling tear gas canisters, sending crowds running along the rubble-strewn avenues. At least some suspected looters were beaten and shot.

Haitians seemed increasingly frustrated by a seemingly invisible government — some setting bonfires in a downtown street to burn the bodies authorities have been unable to remove, leaving passers-by to cover their faces against the smell of burning flesh.