Sixteen hours after he was thrown onto a Port-au-Prince rubbish dump and set alight, the body of the lynched thief was still smouldering – a macabre glimpse of the sporadic violence that is flaring up in this desperate city.

With water, food and shelter in short supply for hundreds of thousands of earthquake survivors, localised flashpoints of looting and vigilante action to punish the perpetrators have arisen across the city. Haitian police were also reported to have shot dead at least one looter.

Incongruously, the thief's last resting place lay between two institutions of peace and culture. On one side of the street in which he lay was a church, on the other an art gallery, the Musart Beau Decor.

The body had been burned to a cinder but you could see the remnants of a tyre that had been lain on or around him as part of the living funeral pyre of rubbish that had been created for him by the lynch mob. The thief — whose identity will probably never be known other than the description offered by locals of "le voleur" — made the fatal error of trying to steal fruit juice from a nearby street vendor in Petionville, a neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince where there is a relatively active police presence. By some accounts, the man pulled out a gun and shot the vendor in the head as he was making the robbery.

Police were close at hand — their headquarters are just a few blocks away — and the thief was apprehended. What happened next is unclear. But the end result is certain: he was frogmarched by about 12 men, beaten, thrown on the street, covered with a pyre of rubbish, and burned.

Antoine Miguel, a resident who was among a group assembled around the smouldering corpse, said that it was suspected the thief was one of 3,000 inmates who broke out of the National Penitentiary in the city after the earthquake unexpectedly granted them freedom. The quake released a few prisoners, who in turn overpowered the guards and opened all the cells, pouring on to the streets several of the most dangerous gang leaders who had previously terrorised parts of the city.

Reuters reporters gained access to the inside of the prison where they found that on their way out the inmates had burned most of the prison records, making the job of tracking them down and bringing them back to jail all the more difficult.

The prison breakout has spread fear, particularly in Cite Soleil, a poor neighbourhood with a notorious history of gang violence that had begun to become more peaceful under the interventions of Haitian president Rene Prevail. Now Cite Soleil is braced for a return of the gangs.

"They got out of prison and now they're going around trying to rob people," said Cite Soleil resident Elgin St Louis, 34, told Reuters. "Last night they spent the whole night shooting," she added. "We dread their return," said another.

So far, warnings that Port-au-Prince would descend into anarchy have not materialised. Lawlessness has been localised and confined largely to the night. But the few incidents have been brutal. In the Delmar neighbourhood, two suspected looters were tied together and beaten before being dragged through the streets.

As for the thief of Petionville, he will not be much mourned. "This isn't good, this isn't good," said Miguel, "But if the people don't do something about these criminals running amok, who will?"