Devastated by a 7.0 magnitude earthquake, the country of Haiti is reeling as tens of thousands are likely dead and many more injured or without necessities.

As relief and rescue efforts come into the country, many people around the world are wondering what they can do to help out. Always charitable, the poker community has also come together to help, and three sites in particular — PokerStars, Full Tilt, and Cake — have said that they will match 100 percent of all players’ donations through their sites, while DoylesRoom is donating all of its entry fees, as well as added money, from its weekly celebrity bounty tournament.

Players signing onto the PokerStars software today were greeted with this message:

“PokerStars is offering its help to the people of the Earthquake-ravaged Caribbean nation of Haiti, and as always, we’re calling on our players to contribute. It is estimated that as many as three million people have been affected by the huge tremor, which registered a magnitude of 7.0. There are two ways to donate to the cause.”

The site allows players to donate privately through its “Transfer Funds” option by writing in ‘Haiti Fund’ or publicly through one of its special dummy tournaments (poker tournaments will not actually run). The fake tourneys have buy-ins of $1, $2, $5, $10, $20, $50, $100, $200,and $1,000. They can be found under the Tourney-Special tab. PokerStars will match all donations, whichever method you choose to give, and send the total to the Red Cross.

On Full Tilt Poker, players can register for dummy tournaments, as well. The events can be found under the Tournament tab for Sunday at 6 p.m. ET with a variety of buy-in amounts — $1, $2, $5, $10, and $26. FTP will also match all donations. Players may also choose to donate privately by transferring funds to ‘Aid for Haiti’ on the site. The site will also run a number of charitable tournaments wherein half of the prize pool goes to relief efforts.

Cake Poker is also matching its players’ donations and has formed three dummy tournaments — at $5, $25, and $100. Those funds will be sent to the American Red Cross.

As for DoylesRoom, the site will be donating all of its tournament fees from this Wednesday’s celebrity poker tournament, which takes place at 9:30 p.m. ET. Mickey Rourke, Nicky Hilton, Kevin Connolly, and Doyle Brunson are all expected to play.

The site will also be matching the $27.50 buy-in of any first-time player, as well as all bounty money collected during the tournament for relief efforts in Haiti.

“Our thoughts and prayers go out to the victims of the earthquake and the families of those affected by the disaster in Haiti,” said Brunson. “It’s times like these that make you realize how lucky all of us really are. It really puts things in perspective.”