For now, joining one of these trips means sitting side by side with the earthquake’s many chapters of misery.

Just after Mr. Dorvil carried his wounded sister, Mikerlyne, aboard, and found room for another sister, Silvin, 22, the truck filled with bags and a few dozen tired people with bloodshot eyes.

In the front corner, nearest to the driver, sat a woman with a toddler in jean shorts who fell asleep as soon as the truck started moving. Farther down the hard steel bench, there was an older woman with streaks of gray and soft wrinkles. Mostly, though, the bed of the large truck was crammed with younger people, ages 16 to 40, the workers of Haiti who supported extended families — those who became city folk to find fortunes, or at least jobs and maybe a little excitement.

Mary Louis, 24, who has honey skin and wore a baby blue cap that matched her shirt, said she was visiting her sister in a hospital near Arcahaie. Other relatives had taken the sister there because she could not find any care in the city.

Bazil Juedy, 23, said he was going north to get carpentry tools to replace the ones now buried under the rubble with many of the friends he used to work with.

It was around 8 a.m., and over the next hour and a half, the landscape transformed. Sugar cane fields replaced collapsed buildings. Flowers pink as cherry bubble gum climbed fences by the road near fruit stands and potato chip vendors.

There was even, at one point, the smell of lilacs — a sharp contrast to the putrid smell of bodies and burned tires in the capital.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At each stop, a few passengers got off the large tap-tap truck, named for the sound of passengers hitting the metal side to signal they were ready to be dropped off.

One man, on a cellphone, provided an update from the city he left behind.

“There are so many people dead, so many people injured. But we’re O.K.,” said the man in the purple shirt.

At a gas station, he continued as other buses with magnificent names painted on them — Princess, Christ Seule, Christ Vivante — blared their horns. “I haven’t eaten; I can’t eat,” he said. He said eight people in his family, including sisters and cousins, died when the tremors hit.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“I didn’t find one of them,” he said. When he was asked later if he ever thought he would return to the capital, the man, Jean Mercellus, 40, said he doubted it.

Arckela Dorvil, 25, a communications student with broad shoulders and a quiet mien, sounded more hopeful. “We have a chance to make Haiti beautiful,” he said. “With education, with hospitals, I hope it will be better than before.”

His sisters were unwilling to talk. They sat close together in clothes they borrowed from their neighbors that seemed, somehow, clean, if not pressed. Happier times could be seen on their fingernails; Mikerlyne, 17, who sat with her arms around her siblings, wore deep red nail polish that had chipped; Silvin wore a softer shade of pink.

Mr. Dorvil said they had all been in their living room watching television when the earthquake hit. The walls shook, he ran, and the house tilted and slid to the side like a sled on a snowy hill. Neighbors, relatives and friends helped pull out his siblings, but two sisters remain hospitalized. Asked how they were doing, he said “not good.”

The truck suddenly hit a large bump. Whether from pain, or the thought of her sisters, Mikerlyne turned away and wiped a tear from her eyes. Deep red bruises, half moons, hung beneath them.

Another tap-tap. Another town: Carries, where the former dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier, known as Baby Doc, used to vacation, the town where the Dorvils needed to get off.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Dorvil ran down to the wharf and found a seat for his sisters near the front of a boat heading to Gonâve. He ran back to his sister. Leaning forward, he pulled her arms so she could rest on his back — she swore from the pain. Moving down the stairs of the boat deck brought more agony, then relief. “We’re almost home,” Mr. Dorvil said.

All around him were others making the same trek: men with sweaty brows, a woman with a bandaged leg, and too many mothers and babies to count.

“We used to make one trip a day,” said Remy Fabian, the boat captain. “Now we make three because the boat fills up so quickly.”

Up and down the national highway that the tap-tap took, it was much the same. Every day, more of the capital’s battered and bruised make their way to small towns farther north. Residents said they saw more children in the streets. There are more hugs at the bus stops too, but mostly there is still grief and struggle.

At one small group of homes in Senta, around a dozen relatives had arrived since the earthquake. Adolf Orcel, 34, had come only hours earlier, with a scar on his shoulder and a swollen leg; Maxo Laguerre, 30, made the trip last week. He said he felt lucky because his house fell but all seven members of his family survived.

Then there was Cilencux Weisner. At 38, he seemed to be something of a patriarch. He said that he had come back to the family homestead with his wife, and that he was glad to have seen other friends and family members arrive from the city. But his two children, a 10-year-old son and an 8-year-old daughter, were missing. They were out playing when the earthquake hit.

“They’re lost,” he said. “I don’t even know where to look for them.”