People walk along a debris-covered street in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, on Jan. 17, 2010. World leaders have pledged massive assistance to rebuild Haiti after the earthquake killed as many as 200,000 people, but five days into the crisis, aid distribution is still random, chaotic and minimal. Photograph by: Daniel Aguilar, Reuters

The Gazette's Sue Montgomery and Phil Carpenter are on the ground Haiti to bring you the latest news, photos and videos from the ground. Check montrealgazette.com/haitiquake regularly for their updates.

QUEBEC PLEDGES $3M IN EMERGENCY AID TO HAITI

QUEBEC – The Quebec government is providing $3 million in immediate emergency aid to help the people of Haiti.

Premier Jean Charest said Monday the money will be given out to non-governmental agencies that are already working in Haiti.

“They will be able to use this to help people in emergency situations,” Charest told reporters in Quebec City.

He added that Haiti has been the province's top priority in international aid.

“We will continue to be there in the long term as well,” he added.

Quebec has already offered to provide any personnel to assist in Canada's relief effort in Haiti, including police officers and health professionals.

The province is also looking at revising its immigration and adoption policies and working with the federal government on those issues.

Charest noted that former Liberal MP Serge Marcil is still unaccounted for in Haiti following the quake.

– Canwest News Service

AUSSIE TV CREWS PULL BABY FROM HAITI RUINS

PORT-AU-PRINCE – Rival Australian news crews said Monday that saving a life came before doing their jobs when they rescued an 18-month-old baby from underneath the rubble in earthquake-devastated Haiti.

Richard Moran, a cameraman with the commercial Nine Network, put down his camera and lifted pieces of concrete out of the way while Nine's interpreter and fixer Deiby Celestino climbed into the tangled mess to retrieve the child.

"And then, out of the ruins came this little girl, and I will never forget it. She did not cry. She looked astonished, almost as if she was seeing the world for the first time," Nine reporter Robert Penfold told The Australian.

The images of the child's rescue were captured by Nine's major rival Seven, and footage beamed around the world showed Seven's correspondent Mike Amor holding the dusty little girl and giving her water.

"That moment, it was beyond news," Amor said. "I haven't seen anything so remarkable since the birth of my own child. The emotion for all of us has been incredible."

– Agence France-Presse

VIOLENCE ON THE RISE AS RELIEF EFFORT GAINS PACE

PORT-AU-PRINCE - The Red Cross warned Monday that violence by desperate Haitians is growing despite the mammoth international earthquake relief operation and the arrival of thousands of U.S. troops.

While emergency teams have found more survivors in the rubble, conditions have barely improved for the hundreds of thousands sleeping rough in the streets.

Aid agencies said a huge international relief operation for survivors of Haiti's devastating earthquake was gaining pace on Monday, as the United Nations rushed to check a critical fuel shortage.

UN agencies and the Red Cross said field hospitals and food distribution multiplied in and around the capital Port-au-Prince, nearly six days after the magnitude 7.0 quake wrought huge destruction, leaving hundreds of thousands of people homeless and thousands injured.

Hundreds of people ransacked a Port-au-Prince market on Sunday and police shot dead one rioter. Other incidents have also been reported.

"Prices for food and transport have skyrocketed since last Tuesday and incidents of violence and looting are on the rise as the desperation grows," the International Committee of the Red Cross said in a statement.

Many residents of Port-au-Prince felt they were in "a catastrophic situation," it added.

Six days after the 7.0-magnitude quake, millions of homeless, injured and traumatized people are desperate for food, water and medicine. All around is the stench of rotting bodies.

A government minister said 70,000 bodies had already been collected and officials have expressed fears the death toll may top 200,000.

– Agence France-Presse

850 CANADIANS STILL MISSING IN HAITI

Aid is pouring into Haiti as military transport flights continue to fly stranded Canadians home after the massive earthquake devastated the Caribbean country last week.

Foreign Affairs Minister Lawrence Cannon said at a press conference Monday morning that the number of Canadians evacuated from Haiti has now reached 947 people, up from 593 on Sunday. He added that 850 Canadians remain missing. Eleven Canadians have been confirmed dead.

Cannon also confirmed that Haitian Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive will be in Montreal on Jan. 25 to meet with Canadian and other international officials about discussing the long-term goals for rebuilding the island nation

"We continue to follow the leadership of the government of Haiti," Cannon said.

– Canwest News Service

BULLETS ADD TO HAITI QUAKE DEATH TOLL

PORT-AU-PRINCE – The soothing, cheerful melodies of the Haitian band Pipo playing konpa music on the car stereo provide some solace from the horror unfolding outside and are a painful reminder of the potential of this struggling country.

A young man lay alone in a puddle of his own blood on the sidewalk next to the cemetery, writhing in pain, with no one coming to his aid.

Haitian police, witnesses said, had just shot him after he was caught stealing. It was at least the third such shooting of the day.

A bulldozer rolls past him, a bloated and bloody body hanging out of the bucket, then turns into the cemetery entrance and drops the unclaimed and unidentified corpse into a mass grave. Nearby, a wreath of fresh flowers sits on a gravestone, hideously out of place in this grotesque scene. The stench is so intense, not even a surgical mask sprayed with perfume can block it out.

It envelopes the clothes, gets inside the nostrils and is a constant reminder of the horrendous loss of life here.

In a makeshift and crowded camp set up by Haitians of the completely devastated neighbourhood of Canapé Vert, Florence Laurent can barely contain her tears.

“We have nothing and I’m so hungry,” said the 27-year-old, who is seven months pregnant. “I don’t know what to do.”

All she has is what she’s wearing: a flimsy purple halter dress, a thin jacket, sandals and a necklace of crystal beads. She was able to escape with her 8-year-old daughter, Nelsa, but her husband, Nelson Gentiy, is buried somewhere in the rubble that was once a pleasant, close-knit neighbourhood. “When, when will they help us?”

A helicopter flies overhead, raising hopes that help has finally arrived, then, just as quickly, quashing them as it disappears.

Haitians’ hunger, thirst and pain is intensifying by the day, many going almost a week without food or much water. And with thousands of prisoners out on the street after the prisons collapsed, they fear for their security.

Women are being raped, people robbed of what little they have and gunshots reported.

Yesterday, with gas stations finally reopened, cars crammed the surrounding streets and station lots. Angry men, vying for a place in the endless line-up, screamed obscenities at one another, jerry cans in hand and ready to pay the inflated price just to be able to escape the city.

“We have no choice but to pay,” said Jean-Claude Jean.

Some people have hung large sheets outside what was once home, bearing messages such as WE NEED HELP, or PLEASE HELP US, as if that would speed up relief efforts hampered by communication and logistical difficulties. Only four of Haiti’s approximately 30 radio stations are functioning, cell phones can’t be charged and internet is only available to the few with a satellite phone.

And while roads have been cleared of most debris, the availability of gas has meant choking traffic.

The numbers arriving at the Canadian Embassy hoping for a way out of their misery multiply by the day, and Canadian army officers stand outside the gates trying to control the crowd from surging forward.

One man, his leg badly broken and with other injuries, somehow made it to the gates on his own.

More than 600 have been flown out of the country so far by the Canadian military.

Prisoners who escaped from jail when the quake struck have shown up at the embassy gates. When asked for their Canadian passports, they’ve declared that they were taken away from them when they went to prison. “What were you in prison for?” embassy officials asked.

“Murder,” was the reply.

– Sue Montgomery, Montreal Gazette

THE MOST VULNERABLE: THE OLD, THE YOUNG, THE SICK

PORT-AU-PRINCE – With the help of two wooden sticks, Pierre Charles hobbles out of what the average Canadian would call a shack – a six-foot-by-four-foot structure cobbled together with cast-off wood and metal, sitting precariously on the steep slope of a mountain covered in the rubble of what was once a neighbourhood.

He carries a filthy plastic bag holding his personal identification and a tattered photo album of past memories – both joyous and sad.

There’s one of his sons, dressed in their Sunday best, flashing bright smiles for the camera. There’s a faded black and white one of his mother, who died young, although Charles can’t remember when. There’s one of his wife’s funeral. She died in 1990 of for a reason Charles can only describe as “an illness.”

There are sweet grandchildren – three of whom are buried somewhere in the debris here in Canapé Vert, a neighbourhood in the capital perhaps worst affected by Tuesday’s earthquake. Poorly constructed homes clinging to the side of a denuded steep slope tumbled like an avalanche, crushing countless helpless beings.

Charles, who is only 63, but looks about 85 by Canadian standards, rolls up his filthy pant leg to expose a swollen knee. His back aches.

He hasn’t eaten since Tuesday. It’s a miracle his shack was spared.

When asked what he’ll do now, he shrugs and says, “nothing.” When asked who’s taking care of him, he says, “I don’t know.”

And yet, as another tremor shakes the earth below, sending rocks tumbling down the steep incline, he raises his arms to the sky and bursts out laughing, exposing a mouthful of yellowed broken teeth.

He’s among the most vulnerable here – the elderly, the children, the sick and injured and the people who were homeless and destitute before the quake hit.

In addition, there are about 650 adults and 300 children who are HIV-infected and in desperate need of medication, according to Max Garlin Pierre-Louis, the head of the National Council for the Rights of HIV-Infected People.

Haiti has made major inroads in tackling the AIDS problem, by focusing on prevention before pregnancy, so children aren’t born with the deadly virus that causes it.

The numbers in the last five years have dropped from about 480,000 five years ago, to 300,000 today.

This crisis could set that back, says Pierre-Louis.

“These people need help,” he said. “Not only nutritionally, and medically, but also psychologically.”

Down the steep road from Charles’s place, aid workers from the Dominican Republic – the only country that seems to have been able to get supplies here quickly since they have road access – hand out food.

A long line of starving and thirsty Haitians snakes along the garbage-strewn road, each one holding thin plastic bags or some kind of container to hold their ration of rice, oatmeal, milk, juice, sardines, a candle, Ramen noodles and pasta sauce. It is surprisingly orderly, as if days without sustenance have made people more docile. But once their supplies are in hand, they almost skip away, smiles on their faces.

Charles, however, is too weak and injured to make it from his hovel to the distribution point, but he only hopes his children can be well-served by the international effort to feed some eight million people in the capital.

There is a Haitian saying, he says, almost philosophically, that goes:

Just because you give just a little, doesn’t mean you are stingy.

“We’ll accept whatever they give us,” he said, shrugging his thin shoulders.

When the quake hit a week ago tomorrow, Charles was making his way along the path to his house.

“I couldn’t see in front or behind me,” he said. “There was dust everywhere.”

He fell into a hole and watched as the house next to him swayed back and forth. It fell away from Charles, and he escaped with his minor injuries, by comparison to his unfortunate neighbours.

“I thought I had broken my leg, but thank God it’s not,” he said.

Inside his home, there is a mattress, a duvet, a comb, two plastic jugs, a metal mug and an old leather satchel hanging from a nail.

Charles carefully places the photo album back in its plastic-bag protector.

“So many people dead,” he says, his hand tenderly stroking the cherished book. “So many.”

– Sue Montgomery, Montreal Gazette

IN MONTREAL, HAITIANS FIND STRENGTH IN SONG

MONTREAL – Anybody who was walking down 7th Ave. in the St. Michel district yesterday didn't have to have a map to find their way to the Haitian evangelical church in the neighbourhood.

All they had to was walk toward the sound of people singing.

A full 30 minutes before the 11 a.m service in Église évangélique haïtienne de l'Alliance chrétienne, there were already isolated pockets of worshippers in the pews, holding hands and singing.

In the church basement, the high-pitched sounds of children talking during their Sunday school lessons was offset by the low bass notes of a group of adults over in the corner, quietly singing their own pre-service hymns.

And then, when the service actually began, the church itself became one big tower of song.

All this singing was a local echo of something that reporters in Port-au-Price have found extraordinary about the Haitian capital in recent days: In the middle of the night, you can hear people singing. Many of those with nowhere to go and nothing to do since last week's earthquake simply sit down and start singing together.

"I know that a lot of people have been seeing these stories about people singing - and they wonder why people are singing when things are so sad," said Carylne Garçon, 40, a Montreal North mother of two who attended the morning service on 7th Ave.

"But it's the Haitian culture - song, for us, is like a second kind of prayer."

It was the same story in other Haitian churches and at Haitian community events throughout Montreal yesterday - from the public prayer gathering at La Perle Retrouvée, a community centre in a former church on 20th Ave., to the Église Notre-Dame-de-Haiti on St. Denis St., the Roman Catholic mother church for the Haitian community in Montreal.

But nowhere was song and faith so demonstrably sovereign yesterday than in the 150 lively evangelical churches within the city's 86,000-member Haitian community.

Some of these churches are merely rented apartment units north of the Metropolitan Expressway where the congregation is no bigger than a dozen extended families from the same region of Haiti.

Église évangélique haïtienne de l'Alliance chrétienne on 7th Ave. is different. It is one of the biggest Haitian evangelical churches, with one of the biggest congregations and biggest Sunday schools.

Although the church basement is one big room, Sunday school teachers were able to create two dozen little classrooms in it by using mobile plywood wall dividers. Large sheets of plywood mounted on metal frames with wheels at the bottom were used to create classrooms of variable sizes for the different age groups.

Upstairs, in the church itself, there was a big cross on the wall behind the altar with the words "Dieu est fidèle" draped across it on a banner. On either side of the cross, there were two wreaths in the shape of a heart. And under the cross, there was a projection screen, bearing the lyrics in Haitian créole to the hymns that the 500 people in the church sang.

At the public prayer event at La Perle Retrouvée, pastor François Schutl-ainé led more than 300 people - including Mayor Gérald Tremblay and various federal and provincial politicians - through prayer and song. Of all the songs, there was one song, a secular one, that electrified the the mostly Haitian crowd - La Dessalinienne, the Haitian national anthem:

Pour le Pays

pour les Ancêtres

Marchons unis

marchons unis

Walk united. Like all of the hymns sung yesterday in the Haitian churches of Montreal, the anthem was sung as a statement of resolve, as an declaration of the important role that faith plays in the Haitian community.

A lot has been said and written in recent days about the long string of misfortune that has marked Haiti's history. But there was no indication yesterday in Montreal people's faith has been broken. You could hear that - loudly and clearly.

– David Johnston, Montreal Gazette

MONTREAL COPS STILL READY TO GO TO HAITI

MONTREAL – Although their mission to Haiti has been postponed, 40 Montreal police officers who were to have flown there on the weekend are prepared to go on eight hours' notice, says a senior police officer.

Mario Plante, Montreal's assistant police chief, told reporters yesterday in St. Michel that the federal government cancelled the planned Saturday departures of the 40 officers in order to send more Canadian military personnel.

Sixty Montreal firefighters who were to have left with the 40 officers are being held back, as well. Landing priority at Port-au-Prince's small and fragile airport is being given to other types of foreign aid deemed more urgent.

Speaking outside a Haitian evangelical church, Plante said the 40 officers have already served in Haiti, and have the necessary vaccinations and training.

The Montreal police force already has 42 officers in Haiti. They were there on teaching duty before last week's earthquake, and have since been assigned to emergency-relief work.

Plante visited Église évangélique haïtienne de l'Alliance chrétienne to give the congregation a briefing of what Montreal police are doing locally to help the Haitian community.

After Tuesday's earthquake, he said, every one of the force's 61 officers of Haitian origin based in Montreal was summoned to a meeting to discuss what the force should be doing locally.

Out of that meeting came a decision Thursday to take all officers of Haitian origin in Montreal off regular duty and assign them temporarily to new support tasks within the Haitian community, Plante said. He said this new task force has been assigned to:

Increase the police profile within the Haitian community, with officers attending church services and other community events, in full uniform, to show solidarity with the community.

Ask within the community if there are specific things that people would like to see Montreal police do for them.

Help people who are not familiar with computers to use Web links to find out whether family or friends in Haiti have survived the earthquake.

Among the officers of Haitian origin at the church yesterday was Constable André Belotte, a patrol officer in Côte St. Luc. Belotte, 38, was born in Haiti and came to Canada when he was 3. Although he has never been back to his native land, he said he has put his name on a list of officers who want to go there to help. But he hasn't had the vaccinations and training yet, so he is not among the 40 on standby.

"But I'm ready to do whatever I can, whatever is possible," he said.

– David Johnston, Montreal Gazette

CANADIANS ARRIVE HOME HAVING 'SEEN DEATH UP CLOSE'

MONTREAL – Bobby Prezeau has been driving a shuttle bus between the airport and the nearby Wyndham Hotel in Dorval for the past eight years.

But the 49-year-old driver, on duty yesterday as 79 more Canadians arrived at Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport from Haiti, said he has never seen people as traumatized as those he has been shuttling over the past four days.

After arriving, all evacuees are first taken directly to the Wyndham for processing. Prezeau’s role has been to drive those continuing on to other cities back to the airport or to the train station.

“These people have seen death up close,” said Prezeau, after bringing to the VIA Rail station an Ottawa man who had just returned from Port-au-Prince on the military flight that landed yesterday morning, the eighth such flight since the evacuation operation began Thursday.

Prezeau said the man had spent the past four days sleeping on the streets of the Haitian capital. He had been in a cab when the quake struck Tuesday. A utility pole fell on the cab and killed the passenger sitting beside him.

“Their stories have touched me even more than those I heard when people came back from Lebanon in 2006,” he said. “They’ve all seen death.”

At the Wyndham Hotel, where the Agence de la santé et des services sociaux de Montreal has set up a emergency medical centre, it is these stories that lead staff to believe that the emotional and psychological after effects of the quake will be felt for days, weeks and months to come.

Among those on the flight was 3-day-old Naïs Acacia, along with her parents, Nadège Bien-Aimé Acacia and Aly Acacia. Their story was told in yesterday’s Gazette.

Also on the flight were Lucien Desmarais, a Winnipeg plumber, and his wife, Elaine St. Hilare. They had been working at an orphanage in Cap Haïtien. St. Hilaire said it took them more than eight hours Saturday to drive the 225 kilometres to Port-au-Prince.

“We feel very, very good to be home, but it was hard to leave people behind,” St. Hilaire said.

Yesterday’s human cargo brought the total number of evacuees to 725 – 14 of whom have had to be transferred by ambulance to Montreal hospitals for medical treatment of serious injuries. But it will be some time before the true extent of the injuries not visible to the eye are known.

“It will take weeks to know how we can best support these people,” said Ghyslaine Sénecal, the coordinator in charge of the centre that has been operating 24/7 since Thursday.

“Right now they show very little emotion on their faces,” said. “We orient them. They simply need to eat and rest.”

CLSCs and social service agencies will contact Montreal schools and Haitian community organizations in St. Léonard, St. Michel, Ahuntsic, Montreal North and Pointe de l’Isle, all parts of the city where there are higher concentrations of Canadians with ties to Haiti, to ensure that people who need help get it.

Sénecal was in charge of ASSS centre at the Wyndham when 13,000 Canadians were repatriated from Lebanon in 2006 in a similar operation and she also coordinated health and social services for students and teachers after the Dawson shooting.

This time, between 5,000 and 6,000 Canadians are expected to be repatriated, said Quebec Public Security Minister Jacques Dupuis.

Dupuis, who was on hand to greet evacuees yesterday, told reporters that the operation is expected to last two to three weeks.

– Cheryl Cornacchia, Montreal Gazette

THREE PULLED ALIVE FROM RUBBLE OF SUPERMARKET

PORT-AU-PRINCE – "Hello," said the rescuer, a simple greeting that belied the power of the moment as Maria, Ariel and Lamy were pulled from the debris after surviving more than 100 hours under the rubble - living off supermarket food.

The trio could not know it, but their salvation after Haiti's catastrophic earthquake had begun two days earlier, with a text message sent to the United Nations.

"Someone sent a text message saying they were inside the Caribbean Market, near the fruit, meat and frozen food aisles," said Joseph Fernandez of South Florida Urban Search and Rescue.

The five-storey supermarket, packed with 100 to 150 people, was just one speck on the horizon of rubble that awaited rescuers from the United States, Turkey and scores of other nations.

But with the aid of that text message, ultra-sensitive microphones and dogged perseverance, engineers, rescuers and other experts were able to hunt down signs of life beneath the pancaked store.

"It took us 12 hours," said Umut Dingsahin, a Turkish volunteer rescuer at the scene. "During that time we were knocking and they were responding. As we advanced, we began to hear murmurs."

"We are here to save you, where are you?" the team shouted, trying to reach Ariel, aged just 7, Lamy, 34, and 50-year-old Maria.

Then a breakthrough: "I'm 7," responded Ariel, adding that she was stuck next to a dead man, but as fate would have it covered with food.

"All three were surrounded by food, so they could eat," said Fernandez, "so, unlike normal in this type of situation, we have a great possibility of saving people on the sixth, seventh or eighth day after the disaster."

By early Sunday, the mood at the Caribbean Market had transformed from one of sombre determination to laughter and joy-filled relief.

"It was electric when we saw the fruit of our labour, when that little girl came out," said Fernandez, who had also found two other girls trapped in a school.

"There was a silence, everyone was happy," said Turkish architect Zeynep Gul Uma.

The three survivors were exhausted, but lucid, able to answer some questions.

Ariel's mother ran to embrace her daughter, and Fernandez was able to deliver the good news to Maria's son in Florida.

"Hi, you should know your mother is alive," he said by telephone. "You should know that she is okay, she was in the rubble of the supermarket."

"Oh my God!" came the response on the other end of the phone. "I cannot believe it. Thank you. Thank you."

It was just one of the latest stories of hope to emerge from the rubble of Port-au-Prince.

At UN headquarters, where the walls have become a sarcophagus for so many, Dane Jen Kristensen also emerged from the debris on Sunday.

"He came out without a scratch," said a UN spokesman.

But elsewhere in this ravaged city, rescue workers faced disappointment.

At the Hotel Montana, rumours that a survivor was still alive were shattered when the body of an American man was pulled out of the site.

– Agence France-Presse

VALCARTIER TROOPS BOUND FOR HAITI

PORT-AU-PRINCE – The federal government stepped up Canada's role in relief efforts for Haiti yesterday, announcing this country will send another 1,000 troops to protect and help earthquake survivors and will host an international meeting in Montreal on reconstructing the shattered nation.

Defence Minister Peter MacKay said about 1,000 troops from Canadian Forces Base Valcartier in Quebec will be heading to Haiti this week to help secure order in what he described as a "volatile" and "deteriorating" situation as thousands of people desperately await food, water and medical help in the capital city, Port-au-Prince, that collapsed in an earthquake last Tuesday.

MacKay told a news conference in Ottawa the additional troops would boost to nearly 2,000 the Canadian Forces personnel in Haiti who will be under the command of Canadian Brig.-Gen. Guy Laroche.

Foreign Affairs Minister Lawrence Cannon said later in the day that Canada will host a meeting in Montreal on Jan. 25 to prepare an international "donor conference" that will raise government funds and help plan Haiti's reconstruction.

Among those expected at the meeting are Haitian Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive, as well as the head of United Nations peacekeeping operations, the head of the Organization of American States, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and foreign ministers from Brazil, France, Chile, Peru, Uruguay, Argentina, Mexico and Costa Rica.

Laroche, who formerly commanded Canadian Forces in Afghanistan, arrived in Haiti on Saturday and will decide where the Valcartier troops will base their operations on the Caribbean island. Officials said it would not necessarily be in the capital.

"The government of Canada feels it has a moral imperative to do everything in its power to help with international relief and stabilization efforts in Haiti," MacKay said.

The troops were expected to take about a week to arrive.

– Jorge Barrera and Juliet O'Neil, Canwest News Service

© Copyright (c) The Montreal Gazette