US drones are being flown over Isil's Syrian "capital" for the first time as part of a drive by America to target Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the jihadist group's elusive leader.

Residents of the northern Syrian city of Raqqa have captured photo and video footage of remotely-piloted planes, which Western weapons experts have identified as American Predators, the same drones used in Pakistan and Yemen to attack suspected terrorists.

The US has not publicly stated that it is flying drones over Syria , and the sightings over Raqqa are the first indication that it is doing so.

The sightings are the clearest indication that President Barack Obama has dramatically changed his policy, aggressively stepping up reconnaissance of Isil positions as the US works to assemble an international coalition to fight the jihadists.

That diplomatic effort was given a major boost on Monday when Iraq's parliament finally voted to approve a new government aimed at winning broad support against Isil, with Haider al-Abadi as prime minister.

Mr Abadi, a member of Iraq's Shia majority, whose candidacy was supported by the US and other western powers, had promised to include members of the Sunni minority as well as Kurds within his government. The attempt to heal sectarian rifts is seen as vital to undermining Isil's appeal in the Sunni heartlands, where disaffection with the previous Shia-dominated government assisted the extremist Islamist group in its rise.

Mr Obama immediately called Haider al-Abadi, the new prime minister, and urged him to move quickly to address "the legitimate grievances" of Iraq's disenchanted Sunnis.

John Kerry, the US secretary of state, said the formation of the unity government was "a major milestone" for Iraq.

MPs in Baghdad also voted to approve three senior figures in the largely ceremonial role of deputy presidents: Nouri al-Maliki, ousted as prime minister in July, Osama al-Nujeifi, a Sunni and former parliament speaker, and Iyad Allawi, a secular Shia politician who refused to join the last government.

But the all-important posts of interior and defence ministers would be filled over the next week, Mr Abadi told MPs.

In the battle against Isil, the Pentagon told the Telegraph on Monday that it had "not yet conducted any strikes against targeted individuals", but refused to rule out the possibility that it was using drones for surveillance.

The US is trying to pinpoint the location of Baghdadi, the jihadist who has declared himself the caliph of captured territory in Iraq and Syria that is the size of Britain, and ruler of its eight million inhabitants.

Several residents of Raqqa and jihadists from Isil have captured pictures of a white drone circling overhead, reporting that it flew low over the city for most of Friday and again on Saturday.

Abu Ibrahim al-Raqqawi, an anti-Isil activist in Raqqa who posted pictures of the drone, told The Telegraph he had first seen it on Friday. "It flew over the city for about three hours, from noon until 3pm," said Mr Raqqawi, who uses a pseudonym to protect his identity.

Mr Raqqawi also reported seeing it on Saturday at the same time that other residents posted news of the sightings online.

Experts said they believed the aircraft was an unarmed MQ-1 Predator on a reconnaissance flight. Aaron Stein, an associate fellow with the Royal United Services Institute think tank, said it could be identified by its "distinct downward facing V-shaped tail".

Mr Stein said that the photographs indicated the drone was unarmed. "The evidence thus far suggests that the drone is acquiring imagery - and possibly signals intelligence - of Islamic State positions in the group's most important stronghold."

Killing Baghdadi would be a major coup for the US president, who has been widely criticised for not taking tough enough action against Isil.

Its impact on the jihadist group is less certain, however: Baghdadi sits at the apex of an elaborate hierarchy, with a "cabinet" of deputies who manage the group's military operations and domestic governance.

In the event of his death, power would probably transfer to his deputy, Fadel Ahmad Abdullah al-Hiyali, a former commander in Saddam Hussein's military who is in charge of Isil's Iraqi territory.

In July Baghdadi made a surprise appearance in Mosul, Iraq's second city, where he led men in prayers at the city's Great Mosque, but he rarely shows himself publicly and little is known about his whereabouts since then.

Raqqa, a key city in Isil's embryonic "state", would need to be scrutinised closely in any hunt for Baghdadi.

Mr Obama would be required personally to order a strike against the Isil leader, weighing the advantages of his death against the risk of civilian casualties, but Aki Peritz, a former CIA counter-terrorism analyst, predicted he would do so if the opportunity arose.

"The US is already exerting lethal force against the Islamic State. If it had the opportunity to take its top dog off the battlefield once and for all, the US would pull the trigger," Mr Peritz said.

The US president is due to give a speech on Wednesday preparing the American public for a campaign against Isil tha officials believe could extend beyond Mr Obama's remaining two years in office.

In an interview with NBC, Mr Obama said the US would fight Isil in a manner "similar to the kinds of counter-terrorism campaigns that we've been engaging in consistently over the last five, six, seven years."

He has put drone strikes at the heart of America's global struggle against jihadist groups. Last week the US announced it had killed the leader of Somalia's al-Shabaab terror group.