Michael Fallon says UK is only country flying manned spying missions over Syria, calling Isis ‘a fascist enemy prepared to kill civilians and opponents alike’

RAF steps up Iraq and Syria spying missions in 'new Battle of Britain'

The RAF is stepping up its spying missions over Iraq and Syria in operations against Isis fighters, described by the defence secretary on Thursday as “a new Battle of Britain”.



Clearly stung by criticism that Britain was contributing little to the US-led campaign of air strikes, Michael Fallon said Britain was the only country flying manned spying missions over Syria as well as Iraq.

He was referring to the RAF’s Airseeker , a £700m US-made aircraft equipped with listening devices that can intercept encrypted mobile phone and radio calls, as well as text messages and electronic communications.

The RAF is preparing to deploy a second Airseeker over Iraq and Syria, Fallon disclosed.

He said: “With more warnings of threats to our citizens in Tunisia following the horrific events of two weeks ago, we’re fighting a new Battle of Britain, once again, against a fascist enemy prepared to kill civilians and opponents alike.”

Vital questions about the UK’s involvement in Syria air strikes | Letters from Oliver Miles and Robert Wall Read more

The RAF is deploying in missions over Iraq and Syria all of its 10 Reaper drones, eight Tornado fighters, two Sentinel ground surveillance aircraft, two Sentry E-3D airborne surveillance aircraft, an air-to-air refuelling aircraft, and a turboprop Shadow plane equipped with listening devices.

“We’re delivering in total 30% of the ISR [intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance] of the whole international operation,” Fallon told a conference on air power run by the Royal United Services Institute thinktank.

The spy planes can communicate with Tornado pilots and with British special forces believed to be on the ground in northern Iraq, and possibly in Syria as well.

Britain is expanding its fleet of surveillance aircraft at a time when the RAF strike wing is under severe pressure. The Tornados, based at Akrotiri in Cyprus, are ageing aircraft, and the RAF’s Eurofighter Typhoon fighters will not be able to fire precision-guided Brimstone missiles until 2018.

Gen Sir Nick Houghton, chief of the defence staff, warned on Wednesday that the RAF was “at the very limits of fast jet availability and capacity”. He made clear that a significant part of the increased defence spending announced in the budget would be used to buy more spy planes and drones for the RAF.

The government is unlikely to approve bombing missions over Syria until after the Labour party has elected a new leader.

