The prime minister said the bombing missions by CF-18 fighter jets will end by Feb. 22.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau on Monday took the wraps off his government’s long-awaited change to Canada’s fight against the extremists , also known as ISIS, one that switches tactics from combat to training, diplomacy and humanitarian aid.

OTTAWA—Canada is sending more than 100 soldiers to northern Iraq to train local fighters to combat Islamic State extremists, a mission that officials concede carries additional risks but is vital to bringing stability to the troubled nation.

As part of the changes, Canada will triple the contingent of soldiers now in northern Iraq to just over 200 to train local peshmerga fighters so that “kilometre by kilometre, they can reclaim their homes, their land and their future,” Trudeau said.

“I’m extremely confident that this mission not only is better than our last mission, but is the right thing to do,” Trudeau said.

Instead, Trudeau unveiled a revised mission billed as “refocused,” “more effective” and better able to “capitalize on the strength of Canada’s military.” And it’s a longer mission, too, as the Liberals extended it for another two years.

“While air strike operations can be very useful to achieve short-term military and territorial gains, they do not on their own achieve long-term stability,” Trudeau said.

The Conservative government deployed 69 Canadian special operations forces soldiers in the fall of 2014 to help train local forces.

The prime minister said the troops will be in a “advise and assist” role that he branded as non-combat. But Gen. Jonathan Vance, the chief of defence staff, made clear that the non-combat role doesn’t mean no risk, as troops will accompany their Kurdish counterparts to the frontlines, engage in firefights and even call in airstrikes.

“Our training, advise and assist role will sometimes consist of fighting against an active and determined enemy. Deaths and injury are possible,” Vance told reporters in Ottawa.

“I want Canadians to know that we will be involved in engagements as we defend ourselves or those partners we area working with,” Vance said. “It’s fair to assume that the risks will increase.”

The Liberal government said the changes unveiled Monday will see the complement of military personnel dedicated to the mission rise to 830, up from 650 now. In addition to the trainers, other personnel will deploy to Kuwait to assist coalition forces with identifying targets. Finally, about 100 personnel could go to Jordan and Lebanon to assist the armed forces in each country.

For the first time in Iraq, Canada will help arm local fighters, providing “small arms” that include rifles, machine-guns and mortars.

Four Griffon helicopters will also be sent to northern Iraq to help move troops around the region. And two surveillance aircraft and an air-to-air tanker jet, which Trudeau said are “extremely important” to Canada’s allies, will continue their operations supporting coalition airstrikes.

Canada will also provide a big boost in aid — an extra $1 billion — to help refugees displaced by the violence and assist countries in the region cope with the humanitarian crises.

Trudeau said the changes will be brought before Parliament next week for debate and a vote.

The end of combat operations by the CF-18s makes good on a Liberal election pledge. Yet both Trudeau and Vance were pressed Monday on the wisdom of ending bombing missions at a time when other allied nations have stepped up their military fight against the Islamic State.

“In any mission, you need to make choices. We can’t do everything,” Trudeau said.

“Canada has many advantages, including hard-earned abilities on training local troops . . . where we can offer the best help in a different way.”

Vance said it was the “absolutely correct moment” to end air combat operations at a time when other coalition nations have the ability to continue aerial missions. Instead, he said it was critical for Canada to focus its efforts on enhancing the fighting skills of peshmerga forces.

“The success of Iraq is going to be through its forces on the ground and for us to provide them with training and the expertise to be able to do that, to defend themselves and be able to conduct operations to defeat ISIL is exactly where we need to be,” Vance said.

Bruce Heyman, the U.S. ambassador to Canada, said the moves announced by the Liberal government are in “line with the coalition’s current needs.”

“Canada remains an essential partner . . . and we will continue to discuss with all coalition partners additional ways to intensify our efforts,” Heyman said in a statement.

Yet the Conservatives — who launched the combat mission in the fall of 2014—accused the Liberal government of “stepping back” when other allies are stepping up.

“There’s no greater threat to human rights in the world than the Islamic state and Mr. Trudeau doesn’t think it’s our fight. It’s shameful,” Interim Conservative Leader Rona Ambrose said.

“If he doesn’t think we should use our military against this group I don’t know when he thinks we would ever use our military,” she said.

With files from Tonda MacCharles