OTTAWA—Canadian military aircraft will begin shuttling weapons and equipment to Kurdish forces battling Islamic militants in northern Iraq and Prime Minister Stephen Harper says further aid could be on the way to halt what he called a “murderous rampage.” Harper announced Friday that two transport aircraft — the CC-177 Globemaster jet and a smaller, CC-130J Hercules — would begin a series of flights to ferry the “critical” military supplies. “As the murderous rampage of the terrorist group Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues, Canada remains committed to providing assistance,” Harper said. “Canada will not stand idly by while ISIL continues its murder of innocent civilians and religious minorities. We continue to monitor the situation in Iraq and are prepared to provide further assistance,” Harper said in a statement. The operation, involving about 30 Canadian Armed Forces personnel from CFB Trenton, will see Canadian aircraft deliver military gear provided by other allied nations, a senior government official said.

Article Continued Below

The move comes as Western nations dramatically escalate their involvement in the conflict to halt the advances by the hard-line insurgents, who have already seized large parts of northern Iraq. At an emergency meeting Friday, the European Union agreed to step up their efforts in Iraq by allowing arms deliveries to Kurdish fighters and pledging more humanitarian aid, according to The Associated Press. France and Britain say they are prepared to send arms to Kurdish forces. Germany has plans to send non-lethal military aid such as vehicles, night-vision gear, helmets and flak jackets.

“This support, which will be provided in close co-ordination with our allies, will enable Kurdish forces to provide effective protection to Iraqis faced with the barbarous attacks of ISIL,” Harper said. Canada has no plans at this point to send military aid itself. Instead, operating from a base in Cyprus, the two aircraft will move the equipment being supplied by other countries. “This will be weapons being supplied by other allies. We will be helping to move them into position so the Kurds can then get them,” a senior government official told the Star. “We’re not supplying the cargo. We are supplying the airlift. This will not be a long deployment and it could be reassessed as required.” On Friday afternoon, Harper met with members of his ad hoc cabinet committee on national security to discuss the situation in Iraq. “They agreed that in addition to the need to contribute to the efforts to stop ISIL’s murderous rampage against Iraqi children, women, men and religious minorities, ISIL poses a serious threat to stability in the region, as well as to global security,” Harper spokesperson Jason MacDonald said in an email after the meeting. There was agreement that Canada must continue to work closely with allies to support the Kurdish fighters in their battle against the Islamic insurgents. The announcement comes just days after Canada had offered urgent humanitarian assistance to assist the religious minority Yazidis, who had taken refuge on Mount Sinjar in northern Iraq after the militants swept their villages. With fears that a humanitarian catastrophe was in the making, British and American aircraft dropped food and water to the displaced people as U.S. military officials made plans for a rescue operation. But a scouting mission by U.S. military team found fewer Yazidis on the mountain than expected, prompting Pentagon officials to say that a rescue was no longer needed. They speculated that airstrikes by U.S. aircraft on militant positions around the mountain had created safe corridors for many of the Yazidis to get to safety. With files from Star wire services

Read more about: