Dead: Abu Alaa al-Afri, the terrorist standing in for injured Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi has been killed in an air strike

The Iraqi military has revealed the moment the terrorist commander standing in for injured Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was blown up alongside dozens of his followers in a coalition strike on a mosque.

Dramatic footage posted to YouTube by the Iraqi Ministry of Defence showed what it claimed was the moment two missiles struck a mosque in Tal Afar, killing the brutal extremist group’s No2, Abu Alaa al-Afri.

The short clip shows the building being completely obliterated by a direct hit.

The huge explosion suggests no one in the direct vicinity would have survived the impact.

However, there has been no confirmation of the death of the highly prized target from Allied officials or from Isis sources.

The news came from Iraqi defence ministry spokesman Brig-Gen Tahsin Ibrahim and was reported by the BBC.

Ibrahim claimed that dozens of jihadists also died in the attack.

It follows warnings from Islamic State fighters that they planned on taking revenge after Baghdadi was seriously injured in an air strike.

He was wounded in an attack from the US-led coalition while travelling in a three-car convoy in March in Nineveh, Iraq, it is claimed.

It is claimed Isis is planning to 'fight back against Europe'.

Scroll down for video

Target: The video initially shows the mosque - which is understood to have ISIS number two Abu Alaa al-Afri inside - in its cross-hairs

Direct hit: The next second, the bomb hits its target - beginning a huge explosion that devastates the building

Deadly: It seems there is little chance anyone inside the building would have survived the bombing

According to The Guardian, Baghdadi is still incapacitated due to a possible spinal injury and has not resumed command.

Sources told the paper his injuries may mean he will never be able to lead Isis again.

Abu Alaa al-Afri was apparently put in charge after the seriousness of Baghdadi's condition became apparent.

One Isis member said: 'They are planning to fight back against Europe. They want to take revenge for Baghdadi.'

Last year there were two reports that Baghdadi had been wounded, but they turned out to be inaccurate.

He escaped death in December when US jets attacked a two-car convoy on the outskirts of Mosul.

His close aide Auf Abdul Rahman al-Efery was killed when a rocket fired from a war plane hit one of the cars.

Baghdadi was believed to be in the second car, which was not hit.

Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was reportedly seriously wounded in an air strike in March

Figures from February showed allied airstrikes, including those carried out by British warplanes, had killed more than 6,000 fighters since September.

The figure included more than half of the militants on the IS ruling council.

Among the dead jihadists was Abu Muslim al-Turkmani, a former Iraqi army lieutenant colonel considered Baghdadi’s number two and the most senior IS militant in Iraq.

His death and that of as many as nine others on the 18-man leadership council forced Baghdadi to promote local warlords to the status of regional commanders, as his inner circle of trusted advisers and battle-hardened loyalists became increasingly small.

Baghdadi, 43, was the head of al-Qaeda in Iraq before founding the Islamic State in Iraq in 2010, while he was declared head of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria in 2013.