Since Boko Haram began its onslaught against the Nigerian state seven years ago, no fewer than 10 thousand Nigerians have lost their lives, although according to an unconfirmed report, the causality figure is close to a 100 thousand. In the last administration, the group graduated to capturing territories and hoisting their flags. One of the achievements of President Muhammadu Buhari is the degrading of Boko Haram and the capture of Sambisa Forest which was the operational base of Boko Haram

While there was celebration and back clapping over the capture of Sambisa Forest, recent events have shown the Boko Haram insurgents are still alive and kicking with the ability to carry out hurtful attacks.

According to a report, Boko Haram carried out 21 attacks in the last 52 days and that prompted the Borno governor to meet with security chiefs.The truth is Boko Haram has not been been defeated, they are only being suppressed. The last time I checked, the sponsors of Boko Haram don’t live in Sambisa Forest, while our excellent armed forces have stopped them from launching attacks from Sambisa, it has not stopped them from launching daring attacks on the Nigerian army.

Recently, Boko Haram launched an attack on a Nigerian Air Force helicopter where Ayodele Famuyiwa, a Group Captain and Air Force Director of Public Relations and Information, said ““The Mi-17 helicopter was shot at severally by the insurgents however there was no casualty except for an airman that sustained bullet wound,” he said.

It is scary that the sect had the wherewithal to attack an helicopter in the air.

Also, at the end of January, more than 20 people were feared dead after Boko Haram gunmen opened fire on a convoy of motorists travelling under military escort on the main road between Maiduguri and Damboa.

The sect reportedly in January, invaded Cinki Gundu, an outskirt of Maiduguri, where an officer and six soldiers were killed and eight others were injured.

Yes, the group no longer holds any territory, schools and roads shut in Borno and Yobe have been reopened and the night light in Maiduguri, which was virtually dead, is coming back to life but it doesn’t mean we should have a false sense of security that we have reached Uguru in the war against the terrorist.

United States President, Donald Trump’s call to Buhari where they discussed ways to improve cooperation in the fight against terrorism through provision of necessary equipment is a welcome development.

President Trump had assured the Nigerian President of US’ readiness to cut a new deal in helping Nigeria in terms of military weapons to combat terrorism.

Trump had never hidden his desire to defeat ISIS , Boko Haram cousins and terrorism and the truth is we need weapons and intelligence gathering from the United States.

The attacks are escalating at an alarming proportion and the promise by Governor Shettima that he will be shutting down the IPD camps by Ma‎y 29 this year is a mirage, let’s stop deceiving ourselves. The government needs to be more honest about the Boko Haram situation and admit the war is not over yet.