AT WAR – AGAIN

President Obama orders bombardments in Syria – as Congress stands by – then makes the case against ISIS at the United Nations.

BY W.J. HENNIGAN AND DAVID S. CLOUD

TRIBUNE WASHINGTON BUREAU /MCT

WASHINGTON – Tomahawk missiles roared in from two directions in the predawn hours Tuesday, as the guided-missile destroyer Arleigh Burke in the Red Sea and the cruiser Philippine Sea in the north Persian Gulf fired 47 cruise missiles across the cold night desert and into the heart of northern Syria.

Half an hour later, F-22 Raptors, F-15 Strike Eagles, F-16 Fighting Falcons, supersonic B-1 bombers and unmanned drones swarmed overhead and unleashed scores of precision-guided bombs.

The third and final bombing wave, about three hours later, involved Navy F/A-18 fighter jets from the aircraft carrier George H.W. Bush in the north Persian Gulf and F-16 fighters from regional bases.

By dawn, the air assault by American and allied Arab air forces against ISIS/ISIL and al-Qaida affiliates had damaged or obliterated 24 distinct targets spread across hundreds of miles, Pentagon officials said.

Arab coalition

White House officials had repeatedly warned that President Obama would not approve an air attack in Syria unless Sunni Arab nations agreed to join the effort to dislodge and ultimately destroy the heavily armed Sunni extremists who have seized control of more than a third of Syria and more than a dozen cities in neighboring Iraq.

Five Sunni Arab governments – Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Bahrain and Qatar – finally signed on over the weekend and officials said the first four nations flew bombing missions or air patrols. Qatar expressed political support without scrambling fighters.

Their involvement was crucial for the White House, which desperately wanted to avoid accusations it was again intervening in the Middle East in the face of Arab opposition.

Gen. Martin Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the first Arab government had agreed to participate “within the last 72 hours” and that the other four governments soon followed.

The timing proved crucial. Intelligence indicated that ISIS leaders had begun to discuss moving equipment, fighters and leadership out of training camps in eastern Syria to avoid U.S. bombing, Dempsey said.

The intelligence “was a factor in the decision to strike now before they could make that adaptation,” he said. U.S.-led airstrikes in Syria are likely to last “for years,” a senior Pentagon official said Tuesday

‘New’ organization hit

Most of the Tomahawks in the first wave slammed into eight targets near Aleppo in northwestern Syria, a stronghold for al-Qaida-linked Al Nusra Front and the Khorasan Group. U.S. officials said the little-known Khorasan operation was led by seasoned al-Qaida operatives and was plotting aviation-related attacks in the United States or Europe.

“We know that the Khorasan Group has attempted to recruit Westerners to serve as operatives or to infiltrate back into their homelands,” Lt. Gen. William Mayville, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters at the Pentagon.

Civilians killed

Outside observers said the attacks killed at least 120 jihadi fighters, including at least 70 who were associated with ISIS and another 50 who belonged to the Nusra Front and who were apparently killed in U.S. missile attacks aimed at Khorasan, which U.S. officials said was plotting an imminent attack on the West.

But Syrian rebels and media activists said the airstrikes also killed at least 10 civilians when a missile struck a building temporarily housing displaced people in Idlib province. They said that ISIS evacuated many of the buildings and encampments struck in Raqqa, ISIS’s de facto capital.

Activists in another town hit in the U.S.-led offensive, Ash Shadadi, said all of the Islamic State’s bases were empty when bombed. They blasted the United States for including Nusra on its target list.

“Nusra is still popular in Syria,’” said Col. Hassan Hassan Hamadi, a defected Syrian army officer whose Legion 5 force has about 6,400 fighters.

But the greatest damage, activists said, may be to the Free Syrian Army, the moderate rebel faction that enjoyed U.S. support for years.

By focusing exclusively on ISIS insurgents and the Khorasan unit and bypassing installations associated with the government of President Bashar Assad, the airstrikes infuriated anti-regime Syrians and hurt the standing of moderate rebel groups that are receiving arms and cash as part of a covert CIA operation based in the Turkish border city of Reyhanli.

Rebel fighters argue that they constitute the only friendly ground force available to the international coalition to fill the security vacuum in places that ISIS fighters are forced to abandon. But rebel commanders said they had played no role in selecting the targets or planning for the aftermath.

Online warning

Twitter accounts associated with the ISIS immediately warned America and other members of the coalition that there would be revenge attacks for the strikes, which came one day after the group’s spokesman called upon Muslims to attack any citizens of coalition countries.

ISIS is thought to hold as many as 20 Westerners as hostages. At least two Americans are believed to be among the hostages. In the past many of those prisoners were held in facilities in Raqqa. There has been no word if the strikes hit near where they are imprisoned and there was no word on their safety.

At the UN

On Wednesday, Obama called on world leaders meeting at the United Nations to “choose hope over fear” by fighting sectarian conflict and extremism, beginning with ISIS but branching out beyond the Middle East.

In a morning address to the U.N. General Assembly in New York, Obama urged leaders to support Iraqis and Syrians as they fight to reclaim their communities, as he also argued the merits of the new military campaign he is running against ISIS as well as al-Qaida and its offshoots.

“No God condones this terror,” Obama said. “No grievance justifies these actions. There can be no reasoning – no negotiation – with this brand of evil. The only language understood by killers like this is the language of force. So the United States of America will work with a broad coalition to dismantle this network of death.”

Obama also called out a range of aggressive acts around the world – singling out Russian aggression in Ukraine for special derision – as part of a sweeping summons to cooperation over conquest.

He pledged to back Ukraine and its democratic development and to uphold the U.S. commitment to the collective defense of NATO allies. He promised to help stop the outbreak of the Ebola virus ravaging West Africa.

Later Wednesday, the president chaired a meeting of the U.N. Security Council where he pushed for a resolution calling on countries to crack down on citizens drawn to such groups.

Congress mum

The United States has begun a bombing campaign in Syria, but don’t bet on Congress returning to Washington to vote on a new war authorization anytime soon.

Shortly after airstrikes against ISIS in Syria started, some lawmakers started pushing again for an authorization vote. But so far, leaders aren’t gearing up to bring their members back to town.

Rep. Justin Amash, R-Mich., tweeted Monday night it was “irresponsible and immoral” that congressional leaders had chosen to recess for nearly two months instead of debating and voting on war.

And the ranking Democrat on the Budget Committee, Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, released a statement saying it’s “time for Congress to step up and revise the 2001 Authorization to Use Military Force in a way that supports the targeted actions underway, but also prevents the deployment of American ground forces that would drag us into another Iraq war.”

Kathleen Hennessey, Los Angeles Times; Matt Fuller, CQ Roll Call; Mousab Alhamadee, Roy Gutman, Jonathan S. Landay, and Mitchell Prothero of the McClatchy Foreign Staff (MCT) all contributed to this report.