UPDATE: Joan is in stable but critical condition, according to E! Online.

Taylor Swift's new single "Shake It Off" has already hit No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, and now we're getting a look behind-the-scenes look at her new video.

Reality TV star Jill (Duggar) Dillard is one of 19 kids with a name starting with "J," and her brother Josh has three kids with "M" names – so will she and hubby Derick use the same tradition for their kids?

Reese Witherspoon is pretty in pink channeling her Legally Blonde character Elle Woods for a 4-year-old boy with cancer.

In announcing a new, tougher stance on domestic violence, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell took responsibility for being too lenient in a high profile domestic violence case involving a star running back. Jim Axelrod reports.

Their tour and marriage was the biggest story of the summer -- but did Beyonce and Jay-Z just punk us all?

Yoga clothes aren't just for working out any more! Stars like Jennifer Lopez, Kaley Cuoco and Jessica Alba have been known to pose in their comfy yet chic yoga clothes in their #healthies Instagram shots, but that’s not the only time they pull out the yoga garb. We're showing you how to recreate their casual but chic looks.

The Yoga-Chic Looks You Can Wear All Day

President Obama ordered U.S. reconnaissance flights over Syria in the effort to battle militant group ISIS. Airstrikes in that country have not yet been authorized, although the Pentagon is planning for possible action. David Martin reports.

WASHINGTON (AP) — President Barack Obama has authorized surveillance flights over Syria, two U.S. officials said late Monday, a move that could pave the way for U.S. airstrikes against Islamic State militant targets.

While the White House says Obama has not approved military action inside Syria, additional intelligence on the militants would likely be necessary before he could take that step. Pentagon officials have been drafting potential options for the president, including airstrikes.

One official said the administration has a need for reliable intelligence from Syria and called the surveillance flights an important avenue for obtaining data.

The U.S. began launching strikes against the Islamic State inside Iraq earlier this month, with Obama citing the threat to American personnel in the country and a humanitarian crisis in the north as his rationale. Top Pentagon officials have said the only way the threat from the militants can be fully eliminated is to go after the group inside neighboring Syria as well.

Obama has long resisted taking military action in Syria, a step that would plunge the U.S. into a country ravaged by an intractable civil war. However, the president's calculus appears to have shifted since the Islamic State announced last week that it had murdered American journalist James Foley, who was held hostage in Syria. The group is also threatening to kill other U.S. citizens being held by the extremists in Syria.

White House spokesman Josh Earnest said Monday that Obama has demonstrated his willingness to order military action when necessary to protect American citizens.

View gallery A member loyal to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) waves an ISIL flag in Raqqa June 2 …

"That is true without regard to international boundaries," he said.

The White House would not comment on Obama's decision to authorize surveillance flights over Syria.

"We're not going to comment on intelligence or operational issues, but as we've been saying, we'll use all the tools at our disposal," said Caitlin Hayden, spokeswoman for the White House National Security Council.

The officials who confirmed the decision were not authorized to discuss Obama's decision publicly by name, and insisted on anonymity.

The U.S. had already stepped up its air surveillance of the Islamic State inside Iraq earlier this year as Obama began considering the prospect of airstrikes there. And the administration has run some surveillance missions over Syria, including ahead of an attempted mission to rescue Foley and other U.S. hostages earlier this summer.

View gallery In this photo released by the Syrian official news agency SANA, Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moa …

The U.S. special forces who were sent into Syria to carry out the rescue mission did not find the hostages at the location where the military thought they were being held. Officials who confirmed the failed rescue last week said the U.S. was continuing to seek out intelligence on the other hostages' whereabouts.

Administration officials have said a concern for Obama in seeking to take out the Islamic State inside Syria is the prospect that such a move could unintentionally help embattled Syrian President Bashar Assad. A top Syrian official said Monday any U.S. airstrikes without consent from Syria would be considered an aggression.

The Islamic State is among the group's seeking Assad's ouster, along with rebel forces aided by the U.S.

The White House on Monday tried to tamp down the notion that action against the Islamic State could bolster the Assad regime, with Earnest saying, "We're not interested in trying to help the Assad regime." However, he acknowledged that "there are a lot of cross pressures here."

___

Associated Press writer Lolita C. Baldor contributed to this report.

___

Follow Julie Pace on Twitter at http://twitter.com/jpaceDC