TONY JONES, PRESENTER: In coming days, the Australian Air Force could well be dropping bombs in Syria after federal cabinet today gave the go-ahead to expand air strikes from its current operations in Iraq.

The Government insists this is not about regime change in Syria, but rather defending Iraq from the scourge of Islamic State.

In fact, Defence Minister Andrews today declared the west of Syria, where the fight with the Assad regime is going on, to be a no-go area for Australian bombing missions.

After pressure from his backbench and an overwhelming community reaction, Prime Minister Tony Abbott also announced Australia's response to Syria's humanitarian crisis, a one-off intake of 1,200 refugees from persecuted minorities.

From Canberra, Jason Om reports.

JASON OM, REPORTER: It's been almost 12 months since the first bombs aimed at Islamic State dropped on Iraq. Now, Australia's fighter jets have a new target.

TONY ABBOTT, PRIME MINISTER: We cannot defeat Daesh in Iraq without defeating Daesh in Syria too.

JASON OM: The request came from the United States and the Australian contingent will join other coalition members, including Canada, Turkey and the UAE.

Six RAAF jets are in action with the possibility of increasing to eight.

MARK BINSKIN, DEFENCE FORCE CHIEF: For all intensive purposes, they just take a 10-degree left turn when they go on task and they end up over Syria. So there's no major change to be able to do these operations over eastern Syria.

JASON OM: There's cautious support from the Opposition.

BILL SHORTEN, OPPOSITION LEADER: But even if the enemy is evil, which they are, even if the cause is just, which it is, our methods must be strategically, legally and morally sound.

JASON OM: It's not a ground invasion, but the spectre of the Iraq War came to haunt Parliament in the form of one former intelligence officer and critic of that conflict.

ANDREW WILKIE, INDEPENDENT MP: To some degree, it's a chest-thumping exercise for political gain. In some ways, the decision to bomb Syria is this week's security deliverable.

JASON OM: Andrew Wilkie says that without an invitation from the Syrian Government as with Iraq or UN backing, the air strikes are illegal.

Not so, according to the Government, which says it's acting in the collective self-defence of Iraq.

KEVIN ANDREWS, DEFENCE MINISTER: Daesh is a threat to Iraq, that the Syrian regime cannot stop that threat to Iraq, and therefore under this provision, we are entitled, as is our coalition partners.

JASON OM: The first of the 1,200 asylum seekers from the conflict could arrive in Australia before Christmas. They'll be sourced from refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey and restricted to families and women and children from persecuted minorities.

$44 million in aid will go towards helping 240,000 people in the camps who need food and shelter.

Once here, the refugees will undergo character and security checks and be asked to swear allegiance to the Australian way of life. The total estimated cost of the resettlement program is $700 million.

Tonight in Parliament, humanitarian agencies, including the UNHCR, have been updating MPs about the crisis.

TIM COSTELLO, WORLD VISION: I've been in Lebanon, I've been in Jordan. Um, it is simply unbelievable. It is apocalyptic.

TARA MOSS, UNICEF AMBASSADOR: It's difficult to see it, actually. You feel quite powerless in the face of the enormity of it and the amount of suffering.

JASON OM: And what do you make about the Government's decision to bring in 12,000 refugees?

TARA MOSS: This is a wonderful step. I'd like to think it is a step. The situation is so large, it's the largest humanitarian crisis in the world and it's a children's crisis. More than half the refugees are kids.

JASON OM: And what's your view about the emphasis on taking in persecuted minorities?

TARA MOSS: Well I don't think we should discriminate based on religion or location of that refugee. We need to look at need. And obviously I think families and kids are a good focus. They're very vulnerable at the moment and need assistance. So, I think that's, you know, certainly what the focus should be: who needs it the most, and there are many.

JASON OM: The UNHCR thanked Australia for its contribution, but cautioned it's just a start.