Chief of joint operations confirms Isis casualties from Super Hornet strikes but will not elaborate on number of those killed

Australian air strikes in Iraq kill Isis fighters on 'at least two' occasions

At least two Australian air strikes in Iraq have killed an unspecified number of Isis fighters, out of a total of 43 sorties by Australian Super Hornet jets, military chiefs said.

Chief of joint operations, Vice Admiral David Johnston, confirmed there had been Isis casualties from “at least two” strikes but would not reveal the total number of those killed.

He said Australian aircraft had increased the numbers of missions as US and coalition forces were drawn to assist Kurdish fighters in the northern Syrian town of Kobani.

Australian planes had also been involved in strikes on an oil refinery, in a bid to destroy Isis revenue sources, Johnston said. Australian fighter pilots did not use the “red card” in the past weeks to pull out of any strikes.

Johnston said he would not provide more detailed information on the number of casualties due to potential exploitation by the “aggressive propaganda campaign” of Isis.

“The more we provide as to locations and dates, they can exploit that information, including back against us,” he said.

Johnston said the United States released more material as it had more planes and thus more strikes. Australia, he said, had a different “national approach” in not releasing as much information.

So far, Super Hornets have clocked up 276 flying hours. Average flight times have been eight to 10 hours. The E7 Wedgetail refueller has flown 11 missions.

Johnston said the impact of the Australian strikes was direct, as well as creating a “morale” boost for Kurdish fighters which would challenge the view that Isis was invincible.

“What airstrikes offer apart from a direct action on top of Isil facilities and degrading their capabilities, they have a much broader impact in terms of morale, the confidence and the notion of invincibility that Isil fighters may have,” Johnston said.

“The broad targets also give us opportunities on their access to revenue ... some of the targets have included a mobile oil refinery that Isis is using to be able to generate revenue.”

Johnston said US air strikes in in Kobani were intensifying.

“Isil are clearly very determined around this objective but they are suffering the loss of hundreds of lives in seeking to achieve it,” he said.

“So while the outcome in Kobani is uncertain, even overnight there have been gains by the Kurdish forces within the town.”

Johnston said the situation around Baghdad was fluid, notwithstanding reports of Isis advances and 150 deaths since Sunday. He said although there were reports that Australians in Iraq had been ordered out, the Australian government travel warning had been in place since May. Commercial aircraft are still flying into Baghdad airport.

He said the 200 special forces remained in the United Arab Emirates, but still had not received legal clearance to enter Iraq. He said the hold up was not a military problem but related to the formation of a new Iraqi government.

The special forces, which have been waiting for clearance for almost a month, will “advise and assist” Iraqi special operation forces. Johnston rejected suggestions that the situation had changed and required more engagement.

“I am confident we will get in there and I am confident we will make a useful contribution,” he said.