SAS and American special forces are working with Kurdish fighters on the Iraqi front lines as part of a major offensive to push Isil jihadists back and relieve pressure on the besieged Syria town of Kobane, senior Kurdish military officers have disclosed.

The Kurdish forces launched attacks just before dawn on three fronts - Rabia, on the Syrian border, Zummar, a town near Mosul Dam, and a number of villages near Daquq, south of Kirkuk.

SAS and American special forces were working along these battle zones as observers on the front lines as well as training Kurdish troops. Brig. Gen. Hikmet also said that discussions were under way to give them a dedicated base near the Kurdish city of Dohuk.

"The [US and UK] special forces have been so effective for us," Brig-Gen Helgurd Hikmet told the Telegraph. "Their special forces don't take any part in the fighting. They are only taking a role in training and teaching, and also as observers. As observers they go to the front line, but don't do any fighting."

It is believed the British air strikes on Tuesday were part of the battle for Rabia, which is a key supply route for the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil) between its "headquarters" in Syria and its forces in Iraq .

Large amounts of modern American equipment seized from the Iraqi army during Isil's push across Iraq in June were taken over the border to Syria across this border.

The villages near Daquq are where the two front lines are closest, with the black flags of Isil flying less than 100 yards across a narrow canal from the Kurdish positions, and a couple of hundreds of yards from the main road to Kirkuk.

Troops there on Tuesday said a force of 3-400 men crossed the river at 4.30am and managed to encircle Isil troops in the forward village of Wahda, seizing the villages of Khalidiya and Saadiya to the north- and south-west. But the centre point of the attack became held up in Wahda, and the whole advance was forced to fall back.

"I was in Khalidiya and the response we met was very heavy," said Khadir Aziz, a Peshmerga soldier. "We never imagined they would hit us so strongly."

One of the commanding officers, Lt Col Safwat Mahmoud, said they had tried to call in air strikes in support but had had no response.

Last night as dusk fell the battle was continuing by the canal, with Isil Dushkas - Russian-made anti-aircraft guns - holding the Peshmerga at bay and also targeting a helicopter hovering overhead.

Brig-Gen Hikmet said the aim of the concerted Kurdish push had been to try to draw away Isil fighters and relieve pressure on Kobane, the Kurdish town in Syria near the Turkish border that is all but surrounded by Isil.

"When we were first at war with Isil, we saw our weapons were nothing - most were not working, even our ammunition was old," Brig. Gen. Hikmet said. "This coalition with western countries is very powerful for us."