One of the things that our ongoing military operation against the Islamic State does not currently have -- besides congressional approval, clearly demarcated goals, the sense that it won't turn into a long-term military commitment, or an exit strategy, I mean -- is a name. These things have got to have a zazzy name, for branding purposes. Remember "Operation Enduring Freedom," and how much awesome durable freedom we got from that? That's what this war-ish thing in Iraq and Syria needs. But as HuffPost's Amanda Terkel reported Thursday, it might not get one:

Lawrence Korb, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress who served as assistant secretary of defense under President Ronald Reagan, said the Pentagon usually names military operations to bolster public support and bring attention to the campaign. In bombing the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, attention might not be what the Obama administration wants. "Usually when you do that, you're trying to rally public support for it," said Korb. "I assume that's why they're not trying to do that. You expect there are going to be a lot of casualties. I think what they're trying to do is keep this on as low a profile as they can."

As the Wall Street Journal's Julian Barnes reports, the main idea anyone has had for a name is "Operation Inherent Resolve," which is a strange because once you start dropping bombs on people, stuff stops being inherent and starts getting pretty damned explicit. And insisting on the "inherence" of your own resolve sounds like the sort of thing that someone who is really unsure of himself does. So it's not surprising that "Operation Inherent Resolve" sort of landed with a wet thump at the Pentagon. Per Barnes:

To some military officers, Inherent Resolve didn’t properly evoke the Middle East. Others faulted it for failing to highlight the international coalition the U.S. had assembled. Still others simply found it uninspiring. One senior official said Inherent Resolve was a placeholder name and never seriously considered for the overall war effort. Other officials said had the name been better received it might well be the new war’s moniker. “It is just kind of bleh,” said a military officer.

Well, if it's inspiration and non-bleh nicknames that the Pentagon needs, Eat The Press is here to help. Here are fifty really great names that the Department of Defense can have for free:

1. Operation Slutty Ron Burgundy Costume

2. Operation Nic Cage Covered In Flaming Snakes

3. Operation Schmoperation

4. Operation Use Figuratively And Literally Interchangeably

5. Operation Biden's Bringin' Hoagies You Guys

6. Operation Native Advertising

7. Operation Lindsey Graham Just Crying At You For Days

8. Operation Supertemporal Eagle Talon

9. Operation Enough With All The IPAs, Christ

10. Operation Demented Goatherd

11. Operation Whoops Now You've Pissed Off Beyonce

12. Operation Who Are The Good Guys In Syria Again?

13. Operation Infinite ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

14. Operation Limitless Quagmire

15. Operation The Wacky Doctor's Game

16. Tyler Perry Presents Madea's Family Operation

17. Operation #CancelColbert

18. Operation Everlasting Shia LaBeouf

19. Operation Incessant Needing To Check Google For How To Spell Shia LaBeouf's Name

20. Operation Wow If Shia LaBeouf Has A Google Alert On His Name This Is Going To Confuse Him

21. Operation I Hope This Isn't Going To Result In Shia LaBeouf Doing Performance Art Outside My Apartment

22. Operation You Just Never Know With That Guy, Shia LaBeouf

23. Operation Really Sketchy Subreddit

24. Operation Perpetual Social Commentary From Lars Von Trier

25. Operation Third Season Of Homeland I Can't Even

26. Operation Try Not To Drop Food And Weapons On The Wrong Guys

27. Operation Revenue-Neutral Operation

28. Operation Thought Catalog

29. Operation Guy Fieri Doing Something Downright Satanic With Buffalo Wing Sauce

30. Operation Comcast Will Be There Between 12 and 4, Trust Us

31. Operation Dangling Participle

32. Operation FedEx Field Parking Lot

33. Operation Dot Tumblr Dot Com

34. Operation The Last Word With Lawrence O'Donnell

35. Operation Sempiternal American Flag Gif

36. Operation Perdurable FUBAR

37. Operation The Thesaurus Entry For 'Infinite' Really Gets A Workout When You Do This Sort Of Thing

38. Operation Do You Think Someone At The Pentagon Just Has This Job, Naming Operations?

39. Operation That's Probably A Pretty Good Job For Someone From The Iowa Writer's Workshop

40. Operation Maybe This Is What Thomas Pynchon Does Between Novels

41. Operation Who's Up To Go Apple Picking This Weekend?

42. Operation Thirsty Rando Eyeing You From Across The Bar While Vaping

43. Operation Vox Explainer

44. Operation Why Can't I Get Anything For Lunch That's Not Quinoa At This TED Talk

45. Operation Everlasting Misogynistic Ed Champion Screed

46. Operation Here's Some Hot Garbage From The Latest Politico Magazine

47. Operation Desperate Email From A Democratic Senate Candidate

48. Operation Incalculable Pumpkin Spice

49. Operation Affleck Dong

50. Operation America Is Basically This GIF Spinning Eternally Now:

[Would you like to follow me on Twitter? Because why not?]

