AUSTRALIAN fighter pilots in the Middle East have attacked their first target in Iraq.

Defence confirmed this morning that the Australian Air Task Group operating from a secret base in the United Arab Emirates dropped two bombs on to an IS facility overnight.

All aircraft involved in the attack, including the Super Hornet that dropped the payload, returned safely to base.

The Defence Force said no other details would be made available at this time.

Tony Abbott confirmed that Australia was involved in a “strike mission on an ISIL position in Iraq”, but he refused to offer any more operational details.

media_camera This is not about religion ... Tony Abbott confirms the first strike on IS. media_camera A Super Hornet Air Combat Officer fits his helmet before the first combat mission in Iraq.

“This is a death cult that has declared war on the world,” the Prime Minister told reporters in Sydney.

“It’s got nothing whatsoever to do with religion. It’s got nothing whatsoever to do with the freedom of oppressed people. It is a group which has declared war on the world, which is killing without compunction.

“That’s why it’s important that Australia do what we can, in conjunction with our friends and allies, to help the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi people to help themselves.”

When asked for his initial reaction to the news Australia has launched its first strikes, former Prime Minister John Howard said he “totally” agreed with the government’s actions.

“It’s a necessary response, and, of course, it has the support of the Opposition and it has the involvement, which is very good, of a number of Arab states,” he told Channel Ten’s Studio 10.

media_camera Mission complete ... A Super Hornet returns to base after the first combat flight, on Sunday.

THE BATTLE FOR THE BORDER

Jihadists fighting to take a strategic Syrian border town have advanced despite intensified US-led air strikes, as deadly pro-Kurdish protests over the fate of its residents shook neighbouring Turkey.

With pressure growing for international action to halt the advance of the Islamic State (IS) jihadist group, France threw its weight behind calls for a buffer zone on the Syrian-Turkish frontier.

The US and Britain said they were willing to “examine” the idea of a safe haven.

The Pentagon said air strikes alone were not enough to prevent Kobane from falling.

Ultimately, “capable” ground forces — rebels in Syria and Iraqi government troops — would have to defeat the IS group, spokesman Rear Admiral John Kirby said.

media_camera Air strikes ... People watch smoke rising from the Syrian town of Ain al-Arab, known as Kobane by the Kurds, after an air strike on the Turkish-Syrian border. Picture: AFP

Kobane has become a symbol of resistance against IS militants who have proclaimed an Islamic “caliphate” across swathes of Iraq and Syria, carrying out beheadings and other atrocities.

Demonstrations in Turkey over Ankara’s lack of action in support of Kobane’s predominantly Kurdish residents triggered clashes in which at least 19 people were killed.

media_camera Anger ... Turkish riot police use teargas to disperse protesters in Ankara during a demonstration against attacks launched by the Islamic State (IS) on Kobane by the Kurds, and lack of government action. Picture: AFP

A new strike by the US-led coalition hit near Kobane early on Wednesday after a flurry of raids the day before, an AFP reporter on the Turkish border said.

Islamic State ‘about to capture Kobane’

The strike sent a cloud of thick black smoke billowing from the eastern side of the town, where Kurdish militia were reported to have forced IS fighters out of several neighbourhoods in heavy overnight fighting.

The jihadists pierced Kobane’s defences this week, sparking fierce street battles that continued on Wednesday with the sounds of heavy gunfire and mortar shells falling on the town.

media_camera Pushed back ... Smoke rises following an air strike on the western sector of the Syrian town of Ain al-Arab, known as Kobane by the Kurds. Picture: AFP PHOTO/ARIS MESSINIS

COST OF WAR: ‘We will spend whatever we have to’

Australia will spend whatever it has to in order to combat IS militants in Iraq, Treasurer Joe Hockey has said.

Tony Abbott has already ruled out hiking up taxes to pay for the current mission, arguing the cost is manageable.

The government estimates the price tag for Australia’s involvement in Iraq will be about $500 million a year.

Speaking in Washington, where he is for economic meetings, Mr Hockey said the Coalition would meet the cost.

“We will spend what we need to spend to defend the nation,” he told reporters.

“Given that we spend tens of billions of dollars each year on defence we have the capacity to deliver what we say we’re going to deliver.”

The Treasurer urged Labor to help back the remaining key budget measures in a bid to repair the books and pay for the Iraq mission.

“Obviously we will be saying more about how to deal with the cost of that in the upcoming Mid Year Economic and Fiscal outlook statement.”

media_camera A Super Hornet fighter jet has carried out Australia's first bombing raid in Iraq, targeting what the defence ministry described as a "facility" of the Islamist State group. Picture:AFP/Australian Defence/SGT Mick Davis

On Tuesday the Prime Minister conceded the cost of Australia’s work in Iraq is significant, but he argued it needs to be put into perspective in a budget of “some $400 billion”.

On top of the cost of the Iraq mission, the Abbott government has also announced a new $630 million investment - since the May budget - to combat terror at home.

However Bill Shorten took offence to Mr Hockey’s claim that Labor needs to help to repair the budget if it wants to support the mission in Iraq.

“I am extremely disappointed that Joe Hockey has chosen to make the Iraq intervention a source of political point scoring,” he said.

“We have offered bipartisan support for this important work, but under no circumstances will Labor ever sign up to support this budget of lies.

“I would ask the Prime Minister to correct his Treasurer because the Treasurer has made a dreadful statement today which doesn’t help us in Iraq or indeed help rescue his unfair budget.”

Earlier Mr Abbott distanced himself from Mr Hockey’s comments, thanking Mr Shorten for his help on national security.

“What is important is that the Opposition continues to support our mission in Iraq and the Middle East,” he told reporters in Sydney.

“Obviously there’s a lot of things that the government and the opposition disagree (about) but when it comes to national security it’s good that we stand shoulder to shoulder together.”

media_camera ‘Whatever it takes’ ... Treasurer Joe Hockey says the Coalition would meet the cost.

GLOBAL CHAOS OVER KOBANE

For the first time in more than two decades, a curfew was declared in six Turkish provinces after the unrest.

In Germany, police used batons, pepper spray and water cannon as Kurds and Yazidis clashed with radical Muslims in two northern cities in violence that injured at least 23 people.

The three-week IS assault on Kobane has sent about 200,000 people flooding across the border into Turkey, but some residents said hundreds more remained two days after jihadists breached the town’s defences.

“There are 1000 civilians who refuse to leave,” said Kobane activist Mustafa Ebdi.

“One of them, aged 65, said to me: “Where would we go? Dying here is better than dying on the road’.” US and coalition aircraft targeted IS jihadists near the town, launching six attacks to help Kurdish fighters on Wednesday, the US military said.

media_camera Attacks ... People watch air strikes on the Syrian town of Kobane. Picture: AFP

The strikes destroyed an armoured personnel carrier, artillery and several vehicles, Central Command said.

“The raids helped prevent the fall of the town, but what is needed now is weapons,” said Ebdi.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a Britain-based monitoring group, also said IS fighters had withdrawn overnight from several areas and were no longer inside the western part of Kobane.

Observatory director Rami Abdul Rahman, whose group relies on a network of sources inside Syria, said the withdrawal came after coalition air strikes hit IS positions “causing casualties and

damaging at least four of their vehicles.”

But he said the jihadists had launched a new assault on Wednesday in the east of the town, also known as Ain al-Arab, following their pullback.

media_camera Major prize ... Kobane would give the Islamic State group unbroken control of a long stretch of Syria’s border with Turkey. Picture: News Corp Australia

Syrian Observatory for Human Rights spokesman Rami Abdel Rahman said IS forces had advanced around 100 metres towards the town centre on Wednesday evening, but fighting had subsided slightly. But he added that IS group reinforcements were heading for Kobane from Syria’s Raqa province.

Kobane would be a major prize for the jihadists, giving them unbroken control of a long stretch of Syria’s border with Turkey. France said Wednesday it supported a proposal by Ankara to create a safe zone along its frontier with Syria to ensure security and to host fleeing refugees.

media_camera Crisis ... Newly arrived Syrian Kurdish refugees walk with their belongings after crossing into Turkey from the Syrian border town of Kobane. Picture: Getty

In Washington, US Secretary of State John Kerry told reporters: “The buffer zone is an idea that’s out there, it’s worth examining, it’s worth looking at very, very closely.”

British Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said after meeting Kerry: “We are at the stage of exploring this.” Ankara has come under increasing pressure to act in Kobane but its response has been complicated by concerns over emboldening Kurdish separatists, who have waged a deadly insurgency in Turkey for the past three decades.

Turkey has detained dozens of Kurds who crossed the border from Kobane on suspicion of having links with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), officials said Wednesday.

Washington and its allies have stepped up their air raids around Kobane in recent days, as the town became an important symbol of resistance to IS.

The group has seized control of large parts of Syria and Iraq, declaring an Islamic “caliphate” and committing widespread atrocities.

media_camera Targeted ... armed men, believed to Islamic State militants, walk along a street in Kobane. Picture: AFP PHOTO/ARIS MESSINIS

Kobane would be a major prize for the jihadists, giving them unbroken control of a long stretch of Syria’s border with Turkey.

Amid warnings of Kobane’s imminent fall, the UN envoy to Syria, Staffan de Mistura, joined calls for the international community to take urgent action.

Washington launched its air campaign against IS in Iraq in August and last month expanded it to Syria with the participation of five Arab allies.

The Turkish parliament has voted to join the campaign but Ankara has yet to announce military action despite the advance of the jihadists on its doorstep.

Ankara has come under increasing pressure to act in Kobane but its response has been complicated by concerns over emboldening Kurdish separatists, who have waged a deadly insurgency in Turkey for the past three decades.

media_camera Protests ... Turkish police use tear gas and water cannons against pro-Kurdish demonstrators in Istanbul. Picture: AFP PHOTO/OZAN KOSE

Originally published as Australia drops two bombs on IS