Canada is again at war.

The decision became official Tuesday night when Conservative MPs voted in favour of Canada joining the U.S.-led bombing campaign against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. They used their superior numbers in the House of Commons to overcome NDP and Liberal opposition.

Canadian military officials in the region will now be tasked with ironing out the final details with allies so the first of up to six CF-18s, two surveillance aircraft, a refuelling plane and about 600 Canadian Forces personnel begin to arrive in the region.

A senior government official said those discussions are expected to take about three weeks, and include figuring out where the Canadian aircraft will be based and how they will be integrated into the overall bombing campaign.

Canada joins Britain, France, Denmark, the Netherlands and Australia as well as Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan and Bahrain in launching air strikes against ISIL.

The U.S. military is co-ordinating the allied effort, but Canadian officers will be responsible for running Canada’s mission, all the way up to defence chief Gen. Tom Lawson.

The U.S. has faced criticism for targeting not only ISIL forces, but also destroying such infrastructure as gas plants, power stations and grain silos. An unknown number of civilians have also been killed in the airstrikes.

The CF-18s are expected to come from CFB Cold Lake in Alberta and the Polaris refuelling aircraft from CFB Trenton. The two Aurora surveillance aircraft could come from either CFB Comox on Vancouver Island, or CFB Greenwood in Nova Scotia.

Postmedia News is reporting that Canadian military officials are in discussions with Kuwait to base the CF-18s and other aircraft there. Kuwait served as a staging area for Canadian military operations in Afghanistan during the latter years of Canada’s involvement there.

The mission will initially run up to six months and be limited to bombing targets in Iraq. However, Prime Minister Stephen Harper has said the mission could be extended and expanded into Syria if the Syrian government gives its permission.

With Tuesday’s vote in the House of Commons, Canada is sending its military into its third combat mission in less than a decade. The Canadian military fought the Taliban in Afghanistan between 2005-2011, and participated in a NATO-led bombing campaign in Libya in 2011.

The mission has become a lightning rod for political debate, with the NDP and Liberals accusing the Conservative government of dragging the country into an ill-advised war with no easy exit.

The NDP, in particular, has pointed to the current situations in Afghanistan and Libya, as well as the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq, as proof western military intervention has actually contributed to instability.

Following Tuesday night’s vote, NDP leader Tom Mulcair issued a statement that claimed the Conservative government was “plunging Canada into a prolonged war without a credible plan to help victims of ISIL terror.”

“They have also opened the door to Canadian involvement in Syria’s bloody civil war,” Mulcair added.

The prime minister also issued a statement in which he highlighted the limited nature of the bombing mission, which he described as “a number of targeted measures” that does not include deploying Canadian soldiers into a ground war against ISIL.