“But if what they’re doing is, in fact, propping up the Assad regime,” John Kirby, a State Department spokesman, said on Monday, “then that’s an entirely different issue altogether, because it is the Assad regime that has been a magnet for extremists inside Syria.”

Mr. Kirby declined to comment on specific Russian military operations near Latakia. The Kremlin has painted the deployments of warplanes and air defenses as a mustering of forces to confront the Islamic State. But Western analysts see its effort to begin bolstering both Mr. Assad’s forces and its own presence on the ground in Syria as having several aims. One is to buttress Syria, Russia’s most important ally in the Middle East, as the government there loses ever more ground to various insurgent forces. The other is an attempt by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to divert attention from the crisis in Ukraine and force the West to acknowledge that Russia still has an important role as a global power.

Mr. Putin met in Moscow on Monday with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, who had gone there to seek assurance that the new Russian hardware and forces — in particular, fighter jets and surface-to-air missiles — would not target Israeli forces. Israel also does not want Russian weaponry flowing to the militant group Hezbollah.

“All actions taken by Russia in the region have always been and will be very responsible,” Mr. Putin told him.

But the threats emanating from Syria led to disagreement between the two leaders.

Mr. Netanyahu said Iran and Syria had sought to provide modern weapons to Hezbollah to open a second front against Israel. But Mr. Putin disagreed, saying the Syrian Army was in such a dire situation that it could not possibly take part in a war against Israel.

“We know that the Syrian Army and Syria as a whole are in no condition to open a second front; they need to save their own state,” Mr. Putin said with a brief chuckle in remarks broadcast by Russia’s state-run satellite television channel, Rossiya 24.