GETTY Warplanes take off from RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus to strike ISIS in Syria

Four Tornados took off from RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus just an hour after MPs voted in favour of launching airstrikes in the war-torn country. The jets struck targets in the Omar oil field in Eastern Syria, dealing a "real blow" to the death cult, also known as Daesh. Defence Secretary Michael Fallon said this morning: "There are plenty more of these targets throughout eastern and northern Syria which we hope to be striking in the next few days and weeks. "There are two types of action the Royal Air Force has been involved in in Iraq: tackling deliberate targets - particular buildings, installations, supply routes, depots and so on, and secondly in close air support of the ground forces.”

The aircraft carry a range of munitions including Paveway IV guided bombs and precision guided Brimstone missiles. Military action was authorised by by 397 votes to 223 – a majority of 174 – after a heated debate in the House of Commons. Two more Tornado GR4 jets and a Voyager refuelling tanker left RAF Marham in Norfolk within hours of last night's historic vote. Six Typhoon jets left from RAF Lossiemouth, Scotland early this morning to boost Britain's military might in the fight against Daesh. They will double the number of attack aircraft at the British base.

GETTY Britain will join a coalition of allies including the US and France

GETTY An RAF Tornado returns after a mission

Britain will be joining a coalition of allies – including the US and France – intent on destroying ISIS. France ramped up its war on ISIS after militants murdered 130 people and left hundreds more injured across Paris earlier this month. Speaking after last night's vote, the French President Francois Hollande said he welcomed British involvement in the conflict. And the US military escalated its military campaign against the terror group in April by bombing targets in Syria for the first time.

GETTY An RAF Tornado prepares to take off to the strike ISIS

A spokesman for the Ministry of Defence confirmed the Tornados had taken off from RAF Akrotiri. He said: "In total four Tornados have gone up. “We have been flying as part of coalition operations in Iraq and we now have parliamentary approval fly in Syria." The decision to take the fight to IS in its Syrian stronghold followed an at-times highly charged, 10-and-a-half hour debate in the House of Commons led by the Prime Minister. With benches on all sides packed and emotions running high, David Cameron told the House that Britain’s best hope of defending itself against terror attacks was attack IS in its heartlands. After the vote Prime Minister David Cameron said MPs took the "right decision to keep the UK safe".

GETTY An RAF Tornado returns to RAF Akrotiri after a sortie

GETTY Military action was authorised by MPs last night

Labour's Hilary Benn was lauded by MPs from across the House for making a powerful speech warning his party should not "walk by on the other side of the road". The shadow foreign secretary was among 66 Labour MPs who voted with the Government while seven Conservatives opposed the plans for military action. Other high-profile Labour rebels included deputy leader Tom Watson and Harriet Harman, acting leader before Jeremy Corbyn was elected in September. Forcefully setting out a case for military action, Mr Cameron said the country could no longer and sit back and wait to be attacked but must now use all force against the “woman-raping, Muslim-murdering, medieval monsters” of IS, who he warned were a “death cult” that was “plotting to kill us and to radicalise our children right now”.

GETTY Hilary Benn's speech drew praise across the House of Commons

"The Commons faced a choice between backing RAF action against the group in its Syrian stronghold or sitting back and waiting for a terrorist attack on Britain’s streets", said Mr Cameron."Delay would simply give IS time to grow stronger."Mr Cameron said the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) and MI5 both assessed that the UK was among IS’s “top tier” targets, while the Paris atrocities revealed the extent to which attacks in Europe were now being planned by “the head of the snake” in the terror group’s HQ in Raqqa, Syria. Spelling out the choice facing MPs, Mr Cameron said: “We face a fundamental threat to our security. Isil have brutally murdered British hostages, they have inspired the worst terrorist attack against British people since 7/7 on the beaches of Tunisia, and they have plotted atrocity after atrocity on the streets here at home. “Since November last year our security services have foiled no less than seven different plots against our people. "So this threat is very real and the question is this: Do we work with our allies to degrade and destroy this threat and do we go after these terrorists in their heartlands from where they are plotting to kill British people, or do we sit back and wait for them to attack us?” Mr Corbyn – a veteran anti-war campaigner – voted against the motion as expected but was forced to offer his MPs a free vote. Speaking before the debate, the embattled socialist claimed "more and more Labour MPs are becoming more and more sceptical" of Mr Cameron's plans for war. He also urged MPs to "think back" to Libya when they vote tomorrow, adding: "We bombed in Libya with no future plan whatsoever. "We now have a vast ungoverned space controlled by a series of competing jihadist forces, some of which are leaking through to Tunisia and we have seen the consequences of that." The Tornados set for ISIS are equipped with precision radar-guided Brimstone missiles which can be used with a high degree of accuracy against rapidly moving targets such as terrorists in cars or trucks carrying oil or ammunition. Targets in Syria are likely to range from senior jihadis to command and control centres, logistics, supply routes and oil depots from which IS gets so much of the wealth that it uses to fund terror. The Typhoon fighters can drop laser or GPS-guided Paveway IV bombs which pack a 500lb punch against static targets such as enemy troops or command and control centres. The GPS targeting allows them to be used even when the enemy is protected by thick cloud cover.

GETTY Embattled Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn voted against bombing Syria

The raids on Syrian targets and intelligence gathering recces by RAF bombers will also be backed up by Reaper drones controlled from RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire.

Britain is expected to send two more Tornado GR4s and up to six Typhoons. But the RAF is husbanding its greatly reduced resources for a campaign to degrade ISIS in its Syrian stronghold of Raqqa which could last for years. Defence Secretary Michael Fallon told MPs on Tuesday that senior Americans had estimated that the campaign against IS in Iraq alone would take three years - and progress there has been “frustratingly slow”. America has been leading other coalition nations including some Arab states in air raids on IS in Syria for several months.

They have been joined by France which intensified its attacks after last month’s terrorist atrocity in Paris and appealed directly to Britain for help. Other options include Tomahawk cruise missiles which can be fired from submarines. Targets are being selected daily at the US-led Combined Air Operations Centre at Al Udeid in Qatar. This has been coordinating coalition raids on Iraq and Syria for months, with the help of British staff officers. The parliamentary vote means that the CAOC has greater flexibility and can deploy RAF aircraft to high priority terrorist targets regardless of whether they are in Iraq or Syria. Before the vote Lieutenant General Gordon Messenger, told MPs that restricting the RAF to operations over Iraq meant that IS fighters in Syria can be let off the hook. He said: “There are examples of priority targets appearing in Syria where UK aircraft is minutes away but cannot strike and the only other aircraft available are 30 to 40 minutes away.”

Airstrikes against ISIS Sat, February 27, 2016 British, French, Russian and US forces launch air strikes around the world. Play slideshow 1 of 63 Russian army carried out an airstrike in Damascus