

Key al-Qaeda figure Muhsin al-Fadhli killed in U.S. airstrike in Syria - Pentagon

PUBLISHED Tue, July 21, 2015 - 4:19pm EDT Photo: Rewards For Justice

Key al-Qaeda figure Muhsin al-Fadhli, the leader of the so-called Khorasan Group which is made up of senior al-Qaeda members, has been killed in a U.S. airstrike in northwestern Syria, according to Pentagon spokesman Captain Jeff Davis. "His death will degrade and disrupt ongoing external operations of al-Qaeda against the United States and our allies and partners," Davis said. The Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF) previously reported that U.S.-led forces carried out an airstrike targeting the Khorasan Group near the town of Sarmada in Idlib province on July 8, striking a tactical unit and destroying a vehicle. The U.S. State Department's Rewards for Justice program had issued a $7 million reward in 2012 for information leading to al-Fadhli. [statement attached]









Statement from Pentagon spokesman Capt. Jeff Davis (click to expand) The following statement may be attributed to Capt. Jeff Davis, Director of Press Operations:



"Muhsin al-Fadhli, a longtime al-Qaeda operative, was killed in a kinetic strike July 8 while traveling in a vehicle near Sarmada, Syria. Al-Fadhli was the leader of a network of veteran al-Qaeda operatives, sometimes called the Khorasan Group, who are plotting external attacks against the United States and our allies. He was a senior al-Qaeda facilitator who was among the few trusted al-Qaeda leaders that received advanced notification of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Al-Fadhli was also involved in terrorist attacks that took place in October 2002, including against U.S. Marines on Faylaka Island in Kuwait and on the French ship MV Limburg. His death will degrade and disrupt ongoing external operations of al-Qaeda against the United States and our allies and partners."



Click here for reuse options!





Sarmada, Syria 6 UPDATES





LEAVE COMMENTS

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.



.