A secret, failed mission by the United States military to rescue American hostages, including the slain journalist James Foley, has been described to The Telegraph.

Two dozen Delta Force commandos landed in Syria in early July, the Pentagon confirmed, but they failed to find the hostages and were forced to retreat after a gun battle with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil) kidnappers.

Earlier Syrian witnesses gave the first detailed account of the ill-fated rescue effort to The Telegraph.

In the early hours of the July 4th – American Independence Day – Abu Ibrahim al-Raqqawi, a resident of Raqqa, the eastern Syrian city that has become the "capital" of the jihadist's "Islamic State", posted on Facebook an eyewitness account of the raid.

Mr Raqqawi, who uses a pseudonym for fear of being targeted by Isil, said most of the information he posted was quickly removed by Facebook's administrators.

However he was able show The Telegraph a screen shot of part of the information he provided that night.

The secret mission used tactics similar to those used to capture Osama bin Laden, the former leader of al-Qaeda to target an Isil stronghold in Uqayrishah, an area 11 miles south east of Raqqa.

Just after midnight, planes bombed what is believed to be one of Isil's three main headquarter's in Syria, a military base named the "Osama bin Laden Camp" by the jihadists.

At the same time, two dozen US special forces secretly landed near a building used by Isil to hold "high value" prisoners.

It is believed the makeshift jail was located on the grounds of an oil refinery in the area.

The commandos used parachutes to jump out from Black Hawk helicopters, which had been "specially modified", officials in the United States have said.

"The commandos dropped from helicopters which were silent: you couldn't hear their engines or their rotor blades," Mr Raqqawi said.

Mr Raqqawi reported the eyewitness account of a friend of his – a farmer living in Uqayrishah – who said he came face to face with the commandos.

The Telegraph cannot independently verify Mr Raqqawi's account, however, much of the information he provided on July 4 correlates with that of the recent Pentagon statement on Wednesday night.

Washington said an American soldier was wounded in the operation and that "several" Isil members died in the attack.

Mr Raqqawi's Facebook post said that five Isil fighters were killed, and that two US commandos were wounded in the attack.

Once their boots hit the ground, the two dozen Delta Force operatives apparently blockaded the main road to Raqqa and started to move in on the prison.

They reportedly fought their way to the cells where they thought the hostages were being held, but found no one.

The troops also conducted "house to house" searches of Uqayrishah, Mr Raqqawi said, including in the home of the eyewitness.

Mr Raqqawi reports that the US commandos were assisted by "Jordanian special forces" who were identified by the Jordanian flag emblazoned on their uniforms.

As they were sweeping the houses, Isil "sent back up troops from Raqqa" and "what ensued was a battle that lasted "three hours".

"After that, my friend saw that two of the commandos had been shot; one Jordanian and one American," Mr Raqqawi said.

After that, at about 3am, helicopters took the special forces away.

The prison that the US targeted was an area that was rumoured among local residents of Uqayrishah to be the place where they kept their "most high value prisoners".

As well as Western hostages, local residents believed the 49 Turkish diplomats, special forces and their families, who were kidnapped from Mosul in neighbouring Iraq when Isil seized the city in June, were also briefly held in the prison.

However, Mr Raqqawi said that a contact inside Isil had told him that the prisoners had been moved "24 hours before the raid happened".

The attack on the Osama bin Laden Camp, the Isil headquarters, caused extensive damage, Mr Raqqawi said.

Isil had previously boasted about the prowess of the camp, even posting online pictures of it's buildings with a banner proudly displaying the camp's name tacked over the front door.

"The camp used to be very active," said Mr Raqqawi. "After that, the camp and the prison were closed for one week. They lay silent and there was no movement there."