US has conducted more than 80 air strikes on Is lamic militan ts this month

The military equipment will be transported on the Royal Australian Air Force C-130J Hercules and C-17A Globemaster aircraft

Prime Minister Tony Abbott described the situation overseas as 'severe' and said 'this is right for our country'

Australian war planes will also deliver arms and munitions to help against Islamic state terrorists

It was delivering 15 packages of water, food and hygiene parcels to civilians as part of a humanitarian mission

The C-130 Hercules was 300 metres above the ground when it was shot at by heavy machine guns and smaller arms

An Australian aircraft delivering aid packages to civilians in northern Iraq, was fired at by Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) fighters last weekend .

The C-130 Hercules avoided being hit despite flying as low as 300 metres above the ground in Amirli, to deliver 15 packages of water, food and hygiene parcels, according to News Corp Australia.

Both heavy machine guns as well as smaller arms were reported to have fired at the transport plane which was making the delivery under the cover of darkness.

The attack was quickly responded to with maximum force by US fighter jets which were providing top cover at the time.

Scroll down for video



Mr Abbott also talked down reports of an Australian C-130 Hercules aircraft being fired at by extresmists last weekend saying he was not advised that they had directly come under fire

The worrying revelation comes after the announcement that Australian elite special forces soldiers in RAAF transport planes, will hand-deliver arms and munition to Kurdish fighters battling ISIS militants in Iraq instead of air-dropping weapons, Defence Force Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin said.

The Australian C-17A Globemaster aircraft is expected to deposit the first load of military equipment within 24 hours at Erbil, News Corp reports.



It comes as Prime Minister Tony Abbott talked down involvement saying there was no 'boots on the ground' role planned for Australian forces in the multinational effort.



'We want to make sure that we know where the arms and munitions go when we deliver,' Air Chief Marshal Binskin said on Sunday at a joint press conference with the Prime Minister.



'They will be landing and handing them over to officials from the Peshmerga.'

Prime Minister Tony Abbott confirmed to reporters in Canberra on Sunday Australian planes would deliver military equipment to Iraq The SAS soldiers are believed to be at Al Minhad Air Base in the United Arab Emirates and will accompany the RAAF C-130J Hercules and C-17A Globemaster aircraft when the equipment is transported, Fairfax Media reports.

'This is about what is right for our country and what is best for our world,' Mr Abbott said on Sunday.

He described the situation overseas as 'severe' and spoke of a specific type of terrorist 'who hate us not because of what we do, but because of what we are'. Mr Abbott said he agreed to join the US-led effort and Australian forces had already participated in a humanitarian airdrop to northern Iraq. The Prime Minister also assured that no specific request to step up Australian military involvement in the area had been made and if we were asked the decision would be made under very specific criteria. Mr Abbott (right), alongside Chief of the Defence Force Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin (left), said Australian forces had already participated in a humanitarian airdrop

'Australia will join international partners to help the anti-ISIL forces in Iraq,' Mr Abbott said.

'The situation in Iraq represents a humanitarian catastrophe.'



He remains in close contact with the US and other allies.

Meanwhile, Greens senators are out outraged by the decision the Abbott government made without the consultation of parliament, The Age reports.

Independent Andrew Wilkie is said to have told reporters in Hobart that cabinet should have had an input on the matter.

'If Tony Abbott wants us to be gun runners for the Kurds at the behest of the United States then we are part of the war,' he said, according to the website.

Greens leader Christine Milne sided with Mr Wilkie, urging Mr Abbott to put Australia's involvement in Iraq at the top of the list for discussion in parliament on Monday.

Australian planes will fly alongside aircraft from Canada, Italy, France, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Prime Minister Tony Abbott responded to the request from the Obama Administration 'Australia will join international partners to help the anti-ISIL forces in Iraq,' said Prime Minister Tony Abbott (pictured).

An RAAF C-17 Globemaster is will be delivering arms and munitions to Iraq after Australian agreed to requests from the US

The Iraq government and other regional countries will co-ordinate Australia's contribution.

Immigration Minister Scott Morrison declined to comment on reports Australia could also be asked to consider deploying Super Hornets for air strikes. The US had not made that request.



'We're not going to get ahead of ourselves,' he told Sky News.

However, the government was looking at Australia's military capability across a range of areas and would consider other requests.

'Defining the mission and the objective was critical,' Mr Morrison said.

'Let's not kid ourselves either, (IS) does present a threat. What we're seeing there is evil incarnate,' he said.

Labor's foreign affairs spokeswoman Tanya Plibersek gave bipartisan support for the weapons drop, saying international backing for anti-ISIL forces was the 'logical next step'.