Some Hazaras from Fatemiyoun Brigade killed today by ISIS assault on Khanasser region

Today, The government's artillery fires many mortar shells targeting Al-Zabadani city, no casualties reported, but massive losses in properties.

New US strikes against a commander of Jabhat Fath al-Sham (Rabah Tahir) near Atmah in the Northern Idlib. Syria

In major reversal,UK now accepting that Assad be allowed to run for re-election in case of peace settlement

Athrya-Khanaser Road in sight of view from rebel held areas ,after ISIS cut the road .

Ahrar-alsham repels an offensive from JFS toward Jabal-Al-Zaweyh and destroys 23mm machinegun

It's fake JFS militants attacking Maart al-Numan city from the northern side. Heavy clashes going in the hospital. Idlib, Syria

Russian and Turkish jets carried out air strikes on IS targets near the Syrian town of al-Bab today, Interfax news agency cited the Russian DM as saying: "As a result of this joint operation, Russian jets destroyed three command and communication points, as well as several militant strongholds," Interfax quoted the ministry as saying.

Video of Daesh attack on al-Madiuna https://t.co/XD6w4BQJZV —

ISIS releases video shows VBIED attacks against SAA position around the village of al-Madiuna, southwest of Al Bab.

Photos from Madiuna, South-West to Al Bab

Member of Tiger Force with Russian sappers

Syrian Arab Army establishes full control of al-Madiunah village from IS in eastern Aleppo countryside, Syria.

SAA against IS in central Syria, Msta-B and M-30

Footage shows the aftermath of Jabhat Fateh al-Sham shooting at demonstrators in Halazon village in Idlib countryside, Syria.

JFS demands the fighters of 'Shamiah Front' in the front lines of western Aleppo to hand over their heavy weapons and cuts the road/food supply to them

#EuphratesShield: FSA take control of al-Muqri and its hill from Daesh east AlBab after intense operations, many Daesh killed

JFS is attacking a demonstrators n Halazon village northern Idlib countryside, a civilian has been killed and many were injured including a woman

Pro-Assad Source on the Ground: ISIS didn't cut Khanasser Road ever

The Russian draft (proposals) on Syrian new constitution: The Parliament can declare war and impeach the President

Intense RuAF airstrikes striking Khanasser region. Wide Russian air-campaign played key role last year to expel IS from area

ISIS controlled entirely on the town of Khanaser in the southern countryside of Aleppo

#euphrates shield forces captures Al-Amiyah & Zakar Villages from ISIS .

ISIS took Khanaser and several villages in the area and cut Aleppo route

Kabr Al-Muqri captured again

IS cut road Hama - Aleppo near Khanaser

IS launched a counteroffensive near Khanaser. Pretty unclear situation, below is a pro-IS map. Khanasir itself is being attacked.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov invited the PYD Co-chair Asya Abdullah to Moscow before the Geneva talks

Turkey officially recognized the Al-Nusra as a terrorist organization - Russian TASS

Sultan Murad Division fighter using Turkish nationalist Grey Wold gesture at the village of Seflaniye in Turkish giving a message to IS: "We are coming, God willingly we are coming, no matter where you go, we will take your heads", northern Aleppo, Syria. https://t.co/aIkpEKNxPq —

Euphrates shield forces at Suflaniyah

Turkey welcomes President @realDonaldTrump's decision to create a No-Fly-Zone inside Syria, says they suggested this long ago.

IS blow up vehicle bomb in al-Madiuna (under government) at road Aleppo - alBab

Russia's Interfax confirmed leaks of new constitution in Syria

Russia says US must think of the consequences of establishing safe zones in Syria

Russia says US has not coordinated Syrian safe zone with it

Russian Navy BSF Moma-class AGI intel ship Liman returns from 97days' Med deployment and transits Bosphorus towards BlackSea under heavy snow

Statement by AhrarAlSham: "We welcome all factions who joined us, and any attack on any of them is a declaration of war on AhrarAlSham".

Another Brigade initially from Darayya also joins Ahrar al-Sham

Russian Navy BSF Ropucha LSTM Tsezar Kunikov 158 transits Bosphorus en route to Tartus for its 1st Syria campaign deployment in 2017

Syrian Opposition factions merging: Approx. of +10,000 fighters merged with Ahrar al-Sham recently

Syria: Opposition (Ahrar al-Sham) managed to stop JFS assault on Idlib Central Prison and secured the area.

IS statement on regaining al-Seflaniyah

Tulsi Gabbard confirms she met with Assad during secret Syria trip

A major merger of Syrian rebel groups in northern Syria has happened: Suqour al-Sham, Jaysh al-Islam's Idlib division, Jaysh al-Mujahideen, Fastaqim Union, the west Aleppo division of Sham Front all have merged with Harakat Ahrar al-Sham following the footsteps of Thuwwar al-Sham who earlier had announced their full merger with Ahrar al-Sham, northern Syria.

Artillery shelling by the Turkish army and Euphrates Shield forces reported on Tal Rifaat town, northern Aleppo, Syria.

The SDF regained control of all of what was captured earlier today by IS west of Raqqa and south of Manbij, Syria.

Member of Congress @TulsiGabbard says Syrians told her "there are no moderate rebels." That's the Russian government line exactly.

ISIS claims to have shot down Russian Granat-4 unmanned aerial vehicle

Kyrgyz in Syria organization has put out videos trying to recruit Kyrgyz speaking Muslims.

Sulfaniyah village is back under ISIS control after strong counter-attack today vs Euphrates Shield forces.

U.S President Trump preparing executive orders to reduce role in the UN, and to create plan for safe zones in Syria

Alleged key provisions of the Russian-proposed new Syria constitution.

Draft of @POTUS exec. order seen by @Reuters directs @DeptofDefense and @StateDept to create plans for civilian safe zones in Syria.

JFS statement on Idlib's Central Prison (seized): Suqur Al-Sham fighters were allowed to leave and prison will be led by Jaish Fateh forces.

ISIS claimed destruction of BMP today, East to Khanaser

Syria: Mujahdeen Army groups in Killi area in north Idlib joins Ahrar al-Sham.

In another statement JFS claims current problems with other Rebel groups have nothing to do with Jund Al-Aqsa.

Syria: Opposition factions repelled JFS attack on Saraqib from Abu Adhuhur area in east of Idlib province.

Video from inside Idlib Central Prison, Idlib Governorate, Syria.

Trump has ordered State and DoD to develop a plan for “safe zones” in Syria within the next 90 days

Ahrar al-Sham spokesman says Jabhat Fateh al-Sham (al-Nusra) have started an assault on Idlib central prison

ISIS statement said VBIED targeted Turkish soldiers and ES forces near al-Deir mountain north al-Bab, Turkish media said 1 soldier KIA

North Idlib: 6 battalions from town of Ad-Dana merged with Ahrar Al-Sham. https://t.co/5RU1lQ3PLc —

#EuphratesShield forces stopped a vehicle was transporting IEDs near of Jarablus

JFS is besieging the prison in Idlib, they started shelling the prison to assault on it while they offered the exit of the leaders and kill rest

Russia has offered Syria to create a Kurdish autonomy

Turkish F-16 hit Daesh targets near Al-Bab https://t.co/NnNhh1iWSx —

Kilis wall

Idlib: JFS fighters show off 3-min video of conquered Sukour HQ, allegedly Sukour's leader Abu Issa's, in Jabal-al-Zawiyah. https://t.co/iYCbMwGk6h —

3 ATGM strikes by IS against Turkish armor east of al-Bab https://t.co/iW9a4yTwwk —

Daesh re-contolled Hamar, Makta Hajar Saghir, Tal Hozan in Manbij

ISIS ATGM strikes near the village of Qabr Al Muqri.

Turkish soldiers injured following ISIS rocket attack near al-Bab

Weapons, ammo captured by SDF forces after foiling the ISIS attack on Mahmudiyah village in Western Raqqa today.

Some photos from Kharbasha town in East Aleppo

Footage of SDF clashing with ISIS and civillians being evacuated to safety. Raqqa https://t.co/jPBVqlmMK2 —

JFS fighters and Suqor al-Sham are reportedly amassing opposite each other in Mirayan, south of Idlib’s Ariha - tension but no fighting

Near Ar Raqqah, 20 CJTFOIR strikes engaged 11 ISIL tactical units and six fighting positions

5 brigades from Jaish al-Islam and Jaish al-Mujahideen in Idlib town of Al-Dana are joining Ahrar al-Sham [for protection vs. JFS]

Government shelling ended on WadiBarada after meeting between Rebels, Russians and Assad government on a possible local ceasefire.

ISIS VBIED struck Assad government troops southwest of Al-Bab

West Aleppo: Zinki claims it fended off pro-Government forces attack trying to advance towards Mansoura.

Geolocated airstrikes in the AlBab area during Euphrates Shield operation in Syria via @etkmkao

Turkish Army reinforcements sent to the Kilis town of Elbeyli included tanks,armored personnel carriers and heavy equipment

SAA captured biggest hills in cemetery area and advancing towards Junaid in Deir eZ-Zor

Syrian Army led by Tiger forces are advancing fastly around Al-Bab in East Aleppo https://t.co/1QRVgqle51 —

Turkish army tank and two armored vehicles destroyed in ATGM direct hits in northeast ISIS-held al-Bab

12 Airstrikes targeted residential neighborhoods in Erbin and Harasta cities leaving Injuries including children

SAA captured Bir al-Fawaera south of T4 and advancing toward Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi in east homs

Airstrikes on ISIS positions in East Aleppo as SAA tiger forces advances towards Al Bab

Also Kafr Naha west of Aleppo was hit by an air strike, probably by the government

Syrian Army captured the Marhitan area in East Homs

The Assad air force bombed the Damascus suburb Harasta

IS expelled SDF from lots of villages west of Raqqa and south of Manbej

Earlier today as a coalition, Jaysh al-Fatah's security apparatus vowed to keep infighting away from areas administered by Jaysh al-Fatah.

Another tank (T-62 or 72) with slat armour was hit by Rebels in WadiBarada, injuring a member of crew but managed to go back https://t.co/jxP8eh6Bgy —

#WrathOfEuphrates SDF repelled ISIS attacks on captured villages west of Raqqa. Many IS members killed

Russia FM Lavrov to meet with Syria opposition on 27 Jan. in Moscow

For the first time in 4.5 years a train in Aleppo will travel from Jibreen station near Airport to Baghdad station

While they were trying to rescuing injured in Erbin city, @SyriaCivilDef volunteers were targeted by airstrike by Assad jets. https://t.co/5NUW5LXQG0 —

JFS (Al Nusra) taken over areas held by FSA in Idlib - effectively crushed the Jaish al Mujahedeen group

Renown Syrian reporter/activist Bahaa al-Halabi confirms that Jabhat Fateh al-Sham was behind his 'attempted' Idlib arrest, but he said he managed to escape arrest/being kidnapped as he managed to hide in orchards and that his uncle was arrested instead but he since been released.

Russian long-range bombers strike Daesh targets in DeirEzZor for fourth time

New JFS statement blames Suqor al-Sham for killing 6 JFS fighters

Thuwar Al-Sham has officially merged with Ahrar Al-Sham.

Astana talks a success: Turkish PM Yıldırım

Yesterday Rebels managed to destroy 3 vehicles, incl. a tank and a Shilka, and inflicted dozens of casualties in Wadi Barada.

Several reports coming since yesterday of JFS and former Jund al-Aqsa forces attacking and looting FSA bases in Idleb, Latakia and Aleppo areas

Airdrops continue to government-held Fuaa and Kefraya – still zero airdrops to areas besieged by Hezbollah and Assad government

Assad warplanes conduct airstrikes on Damascus' Erbin

In a voice message Ahrar al-Sham leader Abo Ammar announces general mobilization of forces to stop attacks and infighting 'at whatever cost'

Euphrates Shield forces at Suflaniye

Images from Suflaniye operation

Turkish aircrafts pounding IS targets Al Bab, Bzaah and Qabasin

Many airstrikes by Assad's warplanes on civilians neighborhoods in Harasta city.

#WhiteHelmets volunteers rescuing injured following artillery bombing on Harasta city https://t.co/tdtNak16rQ —

Ship of Interest: Coming from Balchik, Togo flag bulk carrier Zara transited Bosphorus en route to Tartus Syria

Lavrov: Russia, Turkey, Iran exert efforts to settle the crisis in Syria

SAA destroyed 2 ISIS's vehicles with DShK heavy machine guns on the triangle of Palmyra road in Khan AlManqoura, 10 fighters killed

Civilians injured by Assad government artillery shelling on Harasta city

The SDF, however, initially claimed it repelled a significant jihadist offensive, and reports suggest ISIS sent heavy reinforcements

ISIS claims it attacked Atshanat, Ayuj, Jada and Mahmudli, while claiming that clashes were still ongoing in Jurniyah Syria

ISIS al-Amaq agency reports on a multi-pronged counter-offensive the group launched yesterday near Tabqah Syria

Euphrates Shield forces regained control over Sufleniye village, 17 IS fighters were killed during recent clashes