A ROYAL Navy attack submarine is already deployed in the Persian Gulf – The Herald can reveal.

The revelation came as MPs gave the go-ahead to air strikes in Iraq.

Earlier this afternoon MPs voted in support of the military action against the Islamic State (IS) – voting 524 in favour, and 43 against.

Before the vote Prime Minister David Cameron said the IS forces are “psychopathic terrorists trying to kill us”, and added that the shadow of the 2003 decision to join the US-led invasion of Iraq hanged heavy over the vote.

But he told MPs: “We must not use past mistakes as an excuse for indifference or inaction.”

All three Plymouth MPs voted in favour of air strikes in Iraq, joining the US-led coalition which has been pounding targets in recent days.

Oliver Colvile, Tory MP for Plymouth Sutton and Devonport, tabled a question to the Deputy Prime Minister asking about the likelihood of Royal Navy involvement in the campaign.

“He said there was already a submarine in the Persian Gulf,” Mr Colvile told The Herald.

“It suggests to me that they are keeping all their options open.”

Earlier Mr Colvile said: “It seems to me that we can take out targets using submarines – again, without having boots on the ground. I think potentially the Royal Navy could have a role.

“This matter with ISIS has got to be sorted out. We are not looking at changing a regime, we are looking at eradicating terrorists.”

When asked about the nuclear submarine in the Persian Gulf, a Ministry of Defence spokeswoman said: “For operational security reasons, we do not wish to comment.”

Meanwhile Alison Seabeck, Labour MP for Plymouth Moor View, said the UK had no choice but to support military action.

“Without the use of air power I feel they will continue their forward momentum,” said the Shadow Defence Minister.

“Troops on the ground have not got the capability to withstand IS without that support. The use of air power is vital.

“The US and other allies have led it so far and they have clearly halted IS’ progress.

“In doing so it has helped to prevent a further tirade of human misery.”

Ms Seabeck said air strikes are necessary following “evidence” of terrorist plots across Europe.

“There are potentially direct threats to the UK,” Ms Seabeck added.

Ms Seabeck said the British military’s involvement would be “very different” to the 2003 Iraq invasion.

“At the moment we are talking about six Tornados and that is it,” Ms Seabeck said.

“There is no commitment for the use of anything else. The motion says ‘no ground troops’.”

Gary Streeter, Tory MP for South West Devon, added: “ISIS are a threat – not just to that region but to all of us in the West.

“We cannot let them establish their own state where they can attack us from.

“They are a huge threat to any major city in our country and we have to tackle them at the source.”