The head of the western-backed Free Syrian Army, the “official rebel force” fighting President Bashar al-Assad, has been sacked and replaced as the United States and its Middle East allies gear up to send in more arms.

Gen Selim Idriss, a defected former officer from the regime’s army, was voted out by other rebel commanders still loyal to the rump force. His removal had become inevitable after a series of setbacks, culminating in the loss of much of what remained of his supplies to rival militias, following a gradual loss of influence.

His replacement is Brigadier Abdul-Ilah al-Bashir, currently leader of the FSA’s military council in Quneitra and south Damascus. The choice is significant because rebel leaders, said to be working from neighbouring Jordan, are being encouraged by the CIA, Saudi Arabia and other western allies to regroup and target southern Syria for a reinvigorated effort against the Assad regime following the failure of the first two rounds of peace talks in Geneva.

"The southern front is a major element of FSA strategy," said one adviser to the leadership of the opposition Syrian National Coalition. "Southern lines of supply and communication are secure and able to bring higher volume of supplies quickly to the front lines into Damascus."

He said that he believed the choice of Brig Bashir would win the backing of the rebels' western supporters, led by the Friends of Syria contact group of which Britain is a major part.

"His credentials as a nationalist moderate are solid," he said. "The West can do business with him."

Gen Idriss was seen as a "safe pair of hands" who spoke fluent English and German when he was chosen as leader of the newly formed FSA supreme military council in December 2012. But as an electronics engineer by training he had little frontline experience and never managed to exercise authority over the rebels' broad range of militias.

In a final humiliation, warehouses theoretically under his control in northern Syria came under attack from jihadists from the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Shams in December, and had to be handed over to the Islamic Front, a more moderate Islamist rebel grouping that was nevertheless not under his command.

He denied reports that he had fled to Qatar, but leaders of the Coalition, the rebels' political wing, began to express a lack of confidence in him. Brig Bashir by contrast specialised in ground forces command while in the regular Syrian army, has men fighting on the front lines south of Damascus and has seen his own son killed in action, something likely to ward off claims by rivals that the FSA is a "hotel lounge army".

More significantly, the US and its allies now see Jordan as their major base for expanding weapons supplies to the rebels, funded by Saudi Arabia, including anti-aircraft missiles according to one report at the weekend. The new "southern front" campaign will aim to put pressure on Mr Assad in his capital even as he refuses to allow his representatives to discuss regime change in Geneva.

Three leaders of brigades fighting on the southern front accompanied the Syrian National Coalition delegation to the second round of Geneva talks last week, while President Barack Obama held his own discussions with Jordan's King Abdullah, focusing on the war in Syria and its repercussions for Jordan, in California on Friday.

The south is regarded by the West now as a better bet owing to the dominance of al-Qaeda offshoots, Jabhat al-Nusra and ISIS, across large parts of the north, where FSA-linked battalions are overwhelmingly outnumbered by militant and Islamic Front groups. Jordan has been exercising greater control over both fighters and weapons crossing its border with Syria than Turkey.

The long-term goal for the Americans is said to remain a negotiated transition of power rather than a "push for victory". However, there seems no prospect of that in Geneva. John Kerry, the US secretary of state, accused the Assad regime of "stonewalling" in comments yesterday and also blamed Russia for not applying more pressure on its ally.

"Russia needs to be a part of the solution and not be contributing so many more weapons and so much more aid that they are in fact enabling Assad to double down, which is creating an enormous problem," he said.

Russia responded by saying it was the United States that was upping the military ante. "A course is being set to move away from the negotiations track and once again place bets on a military scenario," Sergei Lavrov, the foreign minister, said.