Turkish tanks opened fire on Isil targets in Syria and fighter jets were scrambled after a Turkish soldier was killed by shots from across the border.

The clashes on Thursday were the first between Turkish forces and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil).

"Turkish soldiers returned fire after shots came from the Syrian side of the border, from the region where Islamic State militants are. The clash is going on at the moment," a senior Turkish official said.

Turkey scrambled F-16 fighter jets to the border region following the clashes.

Turkish soldiers and relatives wait outside a local hospital after two soldiers were wounded in the gunfire (Getty Images)

Two Turkish sergeants were also injured in the cross-border gunfire, although they were not in serious condition, said Suleyman Tapsiz, the governor for the Kilis province.

At least one Isil jihadist was killed by Turkish tank fire in response. An Isil armed vehicle was also destroyed.

A bazooka, believed to belong to the dead ISIL terroist, lies on the ground (Getty)

Local media reports said the clashes were close to the village of Elbeyli, east of the Turkish town of Kilis, and an area where the armed forces have sent reinforcements in recent weeks.

Turkish officials including Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu held an emergency security meeting in Ankara.

The exchange of fire comes three days after a suicide bombing in Suruc, Turkey blamed on Isil jihadists killed 32 people.

Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu (C) chairs the emergency Special Security Meeting in Ankara (Getty Images)

Turkey's Nato allies have long expressed concern about control of its border with Syria, which in parts runs directly parallel with territory controlled by Isil.

Also on Thursday, the Turkish government announced plans for a high-level security barrier along its 500-mile border with Syria.

Bulent Arinc, Turkey’s deputy prime minister, announced a "renewed effort" to "avoid the entry of terrorists and the foreign fighters and to ease humanitarian passages” after a cabinet meeting in Ankara.

"A physical security system will be established along the border,” Mr Arinc said, according to the Turkish state news agency, Anadolu.

“The critical issue here is preventing the entry of terrorists [into Turkey] and taking physical measures along the border against the Daesh threat," he continued, referring to Isil by its Arabic acronym.