Article / January 21, 2015

By: Air Task Force-Iraq Public Affairs

CAMP PATRICE VINCENT, KUWAIT— Throughout December 2014, members of Air Task Force-Iraq, serving on Operation IMPACT, supported the efforts against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in an effort to break their siege of the Sinjar Mountains.

Thousands of Yazidis and other Iraqi civilians fled to the area following attacks on their villages and the town of Sinjar throughout late July and early August 2014.

Several human rights and observer organizations in the region reported that those who fled to the mountains were subjected to starvation, and lacked clean drinking water and medical care for several months as ISIL militants surrounded them. Hundreds of men, women, and children were abducted and killed.

In response to the immediate threat to the approximately 30,000 people trapped on the mountain, coalition aircraft commenced humanitarian aid drops. These air drops included basic supplies such as food, water, and shelter and were conducted at low flight levels by coalition transport aircraft under the threat of ISIL surface-to-air attacks.

In direct support of humanitarian aid drops, CF-18’s provided top cover for a Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) C-130 Hercules transport aircraft on 20 November, ensuring the transport crew was able to safely parachute supplies to waiting refugees below. Canadian fighter jets remained in close proximity to the transport aircraft to protect it from ISIL surface-to-air threats or attacks.

“ After orbiting the area overhead and seeing people waiting for the drop from the [RAAF] Hercules, it was nice to finally see the pallets of aid touch the ground and see people rush out to retrieve them, ” said a pilot from 425 Tactical Fighter Squadron, 3 Wing Bagotville.

Working as part of a larger, coalition air effort coordinated through the Combined Air Operations Centre (CAOC), Canadian aircraft directly supported ground efforts to liberate those displaced persons on Sinjar Mountain.

Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) aircraft flew strikes, surveillance and air-to-air refuelling missions in support of 8,000 Iraqi security forces troops who launched the offensive in late November to oust ISIL militants from positions around the mountains.

CF-18 fighters also carried out strikes using 500lbs and 2000lbs bombs against ISIL vehicles, heavy weapons and bunkers that had been used to guard chokepoints along roads leading to and from the mountains.

“ Given the Iraqi forces’ relatively light arms, it’s rewarding to contribute our heavy weapons to achieve effects on the ground, ” said a CF-18 pilot from 4 Wing Cold Lake, flying in his first overseas mission. “ It’s also rewarding to employ my training after four years as a CF-18 pilot towards aiding in the defeat of an enemy like ISIL. ”

Meanwhile, members of the Long Range Patrol detachment, with their CP-140M Auroras, contributed to the overall intelligence gathering in the area by locating targets for coalition air strikes and collecting battle damage assessment information following the attacks.

“ We had a high mission tempo during the operation and the technicians were working hard to make sure we got airborne, ” said a member of the Long Range Patrol detachment. “ The Block III CP-140 has really been shining on this mission and our crew members have been able to maximize the effectiveness of the camera, radar, and other sensors in the fight. ISIL is having a hard time hiding. ”

Enabling fighter coalition strike operations, the crew of the Polaris air-to-air refueller aircraft was active near the area of operations, offloading several hundred thousand pounds of fuel to Canadian and other coalition aircraft throughout the offensive.

On 18 December, reports that a main road leading into the mountains had been retaken from ISIL resulted in a large exodus of refugee Yazidis off the mountain sides, as well as opened a corridor for aid to reach those still in the area. Only a day later, on 19 December, RCAF CF-18s conducted air strikes on ISIL vehicles and a hardened rocket emplacement between Mosul and Sinjar near the town of Tal Afar.

“ Each day that I flew over the area, you could see the line advancing as the Iraqi forces pushed forward, ” said a CF-18 pilot serving on his first deployment overseas. “ You could also see a definite improvement in Iraqi forces’ abilities. ”

Iraqi forces were able to reach Sinjar Mountain on 19 December 2014 to establish a humanitarian corridor. For the deployed Canadian personnel involved with Op IMPACT, it is satisfying to know that the same people whom they had helped with Canadian aircraft are now liberated and receiving the care and protection not experienced since ISIL’s aggression in the summer of 2014.