Cabinet approves Australian airstrikes in Iraq

THE Abbott government has given the go-ahead for Australian Super Hornet fighter-bombers to begin airstrikes on Islamic State terrorist group targets in Iraq.

Subject to final legal agreement, federal cabinet has also authorised the deployment of special forces to advise and assist Iraqi forces, Tony Abbott announced.

“I have to warn that this deployment to Iraq could be quite lengthy,” the Prime Minister said in Canberra.

“Certainly months rather than weeks. I want to reassure the Australian people that it will be as long as it needs to be but as short as it possibly can be.”

The Prime Minister made the announcement after meetings today of the national security committee and the full cabinet.

Defence chief Mark Binskin said Australia’s first strikes would occur “over the coming days — I won’t be specific”.

Mr Abbott said Islamic State, or ISIL, had “declared war on the world” and it was in Australia’s national interest for the mission to go ahead.

It would be a dangerous mission but it was not strictly true to say Australia was at war, the Prime Minister said.

“I know that you’d love to have that headline, but it’s not strictly accurate,” he told reporters.

“Yes, we are engaged in combat operations. But these are combat operations against an insurgency in support of the legitimate government of Iraq.

“We’re not trying to build liberal pluralism in Iraq, we’re not trying to create a shining city on a hill.”

Mr Abbott said “only Iraq can defeat ISIL, but Iraq shouldn’t be alone”.

IRAQ: ‘Terrifying’ toll has IS advance continues

TURKEY: Approves military incursions in Syria, Iraq

Mr Abbott said the risk assessment for Australia’s forces included small arms fire, anti-aircraft fire and so-called man-portable surface-to-air missiles attack against aircraft. The risk to special forces included roadside bombs and infantry attack.

He said the decision to approve the Iraq deployment had not been taken lightly and ministers were acutely conscious of its seriousness and of putting the armed forces in harm’s way.

“It was clearly in Australia’s national interest to take on this death cult at home and abroad. That doesn’t mean it’s an easy decision.”

Mr Abbott said he was confident the Defence Force has all possible measures in place to minimise risk to the 600-strong Australian force.

“This is not a fight we can or should shirk,” he said.

“It is in our national interest that we do so, it is in the interests of civilisation that we do so. It is in everyone’s best interests that the murderous rage of the ISIL death cult be checked and rolled back and that’s what we’re determined to do.”

Mr Abbott said the measure of success would be “when ISIL are in retreat, not in advance”.

“We will know that we are succeeding when the Iraqi government is restoring a modicum of control over its own cities and towns.”

The Prime Minister again refused to rule out potential involvement in Syria and cautioned against trying to predict future missions.

“Let’s focus on what’s being done today rather than speculate on what might be done in months or years to come,” he said.

Australia has been negotiating with the Iraqi government for weeks after pre-deploying

six Super Hornets, a Wedgetail surveillance aircraft, a KC-30 refueller and a special forces contingent to the United Arab Emirates.

Mr Abbott said he had briefed Opposition Leader Bill Shorten on today’s decision.

“Australia is reluctant to reach out to conflicts thousands of miles away, but this conflict has reached out to us,” Mr Abbott said. “At least 60 Australians are now fighting with terrorist groups in the Middle East and at least 100 Australians are supporting them at home.”

Mr Shorten said Labor supported the mission.

“When it comes to fighting terror, Labor and the Government and working together,” he said.

“In the face of evil, nations of good conscience do have a responsibility to act. ISIL is not the enemy of one nation or of one faith or of one people. It is the enemy of us all.”

Australia ended its last military commitment to Iraq in July 2009, after six years of war involving more than 20,000 personnel.

Defence Minister David Johnston said the Iraqi government was “gratefully welcoming” of Australia’s role.

“The skill, commitment and professionalism of our uniformed personnel is simply first class,” he said.

“They will do a very good job for us.”

The RAAF Wedgetail surveillance aircraft and a refueller have already flown support missions over Iraq, but the six Super Hornets have remained on standby pending approval to join combat raids already being carried out by US and British jets.

Air Chief Marshal Binskin said the air task group and commando unit were “potent”.

“The team is well trained, they’re well equipped, they’re well prepared,” he said.

“The air traffic group’s been flying supporting missions and some training missions over Iraq for the last couple of days and we’re ready to get on with the job.”

Air Chief Marshal Binskin said Defence had the resources it needed. He said while the government had approved the use of eight Super Hornet aircraft, he only needed to use six at this stage.

“I’m mindful of parking space, the costs of deployment ... six aircraft is what we need to do the task at the moment.”

The decision came as senior government frontbencher Malcolm Turnbull warned the fight against Islamic State might require troops on the ground.

“Well it may well do, but as you can see from President Obama’s lead and what our Prime Minister has said, the boots on the ground are not going to be American or Australian boots,” he said.

But when asked if this stance could change, Mr Turnbull left the door open.

“If anyone was going to make a forecast like that, it should be the Prime Minister.”

Deputy Opposition Leader Tanya Plibersek said while Labor backs the involvement so far, it won’t get behind “boots on ground”.

“No, we don’t support Australian troops on the ground in Iraq,” she told the Nine Network.

With AAP