The Yazidis are a religious minority who are regarded as heretics by the Islamic militants.

Admiral Kirby said “the team has assessed that there are far fewer Yazidis on Mount Sinjar than previously feared, in part because of the success of the humanitarian airdrops.”

Video

The latest twist came just hours after Benjamin J. Rhodes, deputy national security adviser, told reporters on Martha’s Vineyard, where President Obama is vacationing, that the president was likely to receive recommendations about how to mount a rescue operation in the next several days. He said those recommendations could have included the use of American ground troops.

But Mr. Rhodes made those comments as the secret team of Marines and Special Operations forces were already on Mount Sinjar, in the middle of a 24-hour trip to talk to the displaced people and pesh merga fighters.

Earlier on Wednesday, France, Britain and Germany all said they would increase their efforts to aid the people stranded on the mountain — where reports indicated that the Yazidis were baking in the heat and near starvation — and to fight the ISIS militants.

France, which opposed the Iraq invasion in 2003, said it would send arms to Kurdish fighters to help alleviate what it called a “catastrophic situation.” Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, who had been under pressure to take more action, said his government would continue the humanitarian aid it had been providing but would now also ship munitions from Eastern Europe to the Kurdish forces.

Germany, which also did not support the United States invasion a decade ago, said it would send nonlethal aid — heavy trucks, bulletproof vests, bedding and tents — to the Kurds.

Steffen Seibert, a government spokesman, called the ISIS fighters “bloodthirsty extremists” and said their advances were “something which offends us all.” The German Foreign Ministry’s spokesman, Martin Schäfer, said ISIS was “an existential threat to refugees, the state of Iraq and the whole region.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For Mr. Obama, who has been reluctant to commit additional American ground troops to Iraq, the report was hugely welcome news. Mr. Obama had maintained — even when announcing that he had authorized airstrikes to help break the siege — that he would not be sending American combat troops to the country they left in 2011.