Lt. Gen. William C. Mayville Jr. details airstrikes in Syria. The Pentagon has yet to name its operation against the Islamic State group. Bendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images

The Defense Department is really good at naming stuff. The operations it carries out invariably seize a historical place in textbooks, speeches, and congressional budget requests, and specifically chosen titles can help shape how military action is perceived by enemy forces and the American public.

Operation Overlord marked the beginning of the massive D-Day invasion. Operation Anaconda started the strategy to choke off insurgents in Afghanistan in 2002. And famously, administration sources revealed the codename for the Navy SEAL raid that killed Osama bin Laden in 2011, Operation Neptune Spear.

Even the U.S. military response to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, concurrent to the Syria and Iraq strikes, bears the name “Operation United Assistance.” Military officials are quick to point out isn’t even a Defense-led mission, but falls under the leadership of USAID.

The Pentagon usually selects names for operations, sometimes at random, sometimes to help sway Congress to provide financial or policy support. But ultimately it’s up to the White House to shape the public message of an important foreign campaign.

This latest reticence to delineate the strategy -- and offer some colorful terminology to represent it -- has left many E-Ring watchers, including some who used to operate inside its walls, scratching their heads.

When asked most recently whether the military operations in Iraq and Syria had a code name, the Pentagon spokesman continued what has become a string of blunt answers.

“No. It has not,” Navy Rear Adm. John Kirby said Thursday. He added, “I know of no plans at this time to name it.”

And so, what could be one of the defining battles of the early 21st century remains anonymous.

“I just don’t know the explanation,” says Eric Edelman, who served as the under secretary of Defense for Policy until 2009, following tours as the U.S. ambassador to Turkey and Finland.

Edelman’s predecessor during the Clinton administration, Walter Slocombe, also cannot remember a military operation that passed unnamed. He went on to serve as a senior adviser to the coalition in Iraq in 2003. They are among a string of former top Defense officials and military science scholars who spoke with U.S. News and could not think of another military operation on this scale in U.S. military history that never got christened somehow.

The practice of offering up snappy names the general public could recognize began during the Korean War, and paved the way for operations such as “Just Cause” in Panama or “Urgent Fury” in Grenada -- among the most extreme examples of titles clearly designed to shape public opinion.

Highly-publicized, catchy titles have become a way for military commanders and Defense officials to petition Congress for money or authority.

As for Operation No Name, perhaps these powers already have enough authority and funding. Either way, there’s plenty of speculation.

Some believe this is part of the Obama administration’s attempt to distance itself from the national security and defense policies of George W. Bush.

“Maybe the problem is the recent custom of giving combat operations names that seem designed to whip up enthusiasm for them,” says Edwin Moise, a professor in military history at Clemson University. He cites Operation Enduring Freedom for the war in Afghanistan, or Operation Gothic Serpent, part of the ill-fated 1993 “Black Hawk Down” incident in Somalia.

“I think President Obama really wishes he were not doing this operation, and the notion of giving it a name that sounds like something a cheerleader would yell might offend him,” he says. “And, he would be heavily criticized if he gave it a name that did not sound like something a cheerleader would yell.”

There also might be some uncertainty in the White House or the Pentagon about the ultimate shape of the long-term fight against Islamic State group, Moise adds. Naming the operation forever ties it to Obama, making it possibly “more difficult to dodge giving a clear description of what it is going to do.”

Indeed every named military operation starts with a beginning date. Historians must eventually assign it an end date as well. Obama may be concerned a clear conclusion against an enemy as amorphous as the Islamic State could never come.

“It will take time to eradicate a cancer like ISIL,” Obama said on Sept. 10, using a common acronym for the Islamic State, when he first announced his strategy to defeat the extremist network.

There could also be a legal motivation to keeping this a no-name operation.

The War Powers Resolution allows the president to deploy troops to address a direct threat to the U.S. without seeking approval from Congress first. However, if Capitol Hill does not vote to approve the military action, the president must complete withdrawing all troops within 90 days of first deploying them: 60 days for the operation, and 30 days to withdraw. The White House could believe that refraining from naming the operation makes each military strike a separate operations, instead of a unified military campaign.

“If the whole thing was a campaign, the 60-day clock might start ticking at that point,” says James Pfiffner, a professor at George Mason University an expert in the powers of the presidency. “If they take each strike and count it separately, then it’s 60 days from when that strike was.”

The ongoing military campaign in Iraq and Syria almost certainly has a classified codename, allowing military planners from the U.S. and coalition countries in the Arab world to understand each other. Such was the practice during World War II, says John Hall, a military history professor at the University of Wisconsin.

Winston Churchill, particularly, wanted to offer war widows something concrete and clear that could account for the death of their loved one, rather than unfamiliar military jargon.

“My suspicion is the administration is so reluctant to create the impression that it is engaging in the kind of military activity that it has forsworn in that region,” says Hall. “It has determined the best public relations strategy is to give it no name whatsoever.”

“I’m not surprised because it makes sense to me,” he adds.

Former President Jimmy Carter will be forever associated with the disastrous attempt to rescue U.S. hostages in Iran in 1980, in no small part due to the widely publicized term “Desert One” for the staging area and “Operation Eagle Claw,” it’s name. These became the catch phrases for military blunders that some believe cost him the presidency.

“I would suspect that the president and others in his administration have to already be considering his historical legacy as a two-term president,” Hall says of Obama. “By giving an operational name to the ISIS problem, I think it’s potentially easier for his name to be associated with an operation that may, in a year, in two or five years, appear in retrospect to have been insufficient and unsuccessful.”

