Fresh election possible as petition lodged with court to declare the six spots void after loss of ballot papers

The Australian Electoral Commission has asked the high court to declare the six Western Australian Senate spots void in a move that could bring on a new election.

The AEC had given a signal that it may take the initiative in petitioning the court itself after 1,375 ballots went missing in a recount of the disputed 2013 WA Senate election.

The commission lodged a petition on Friday afternoon. “The petition seeks an order from the court that the WA Senate election of six senators be declared void,” it said in a statement issued Friday afternoon.

“Given the closeness of the margins that favoured the final two declared candidates, the petition is based on the premise that the inability to include 1,370 missing ballot papers in the recount of the WA Senate election means that the election was likely to be affected for the purposes of s 362(3) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918.”

The AEC brought in the former Australian federal police commissioner Mick Keelty to investigate after admitting ballots had gone missing during a recount requested by the Greens senator Scott Ludlam.

Keelty said recently the whereabouts of the ballots may remain a mystery. “We may never get to the bottom of this. Nearly six weeks down the track and there is no indication of where these ballots are.”

Keelty could not rule out corruption, although he said he had not seen evidence of it. He had signalled he would have liked to conclude his inquiry by the end of this week, but Friday’s statement from the AEC says the inquiry is continuing.

The incident has inflicted reputational damage on the AEC, and the government has made its displeasure known.

The special minister of state Michael Ronaldson said on Friday that given the case was now before the court of disputed returns, he was “unable to comment on the specifics of the petition or any likely outcomes”.

“However, the government has previously made its deep concerns about this significant process failure, which has led to this petition, quite clear to the AEC,” Ronaldson said.

“The government expects the commission to conduct a detailed internal investigation as well as acting on any recommendations arising from the Keelty investigation.”

The AEC declared the WA result despite the missing ballots, triggering the 40-day process for petitions to the high court.

The original result declared the final two WA Senate spots for the Palmer United party and the ALP. After the recount requested by Ludlam, the final two places were awarded to the Greens and to the Sports party.

The PUP said it would challenge the result.

Ludlam said on Friday: “I welcome the news that today the AEC has reached a decision on their next course of action.

“As I am a named respondent to the AECs petition we'll be seeking legal advice and won't be commenting further at this time.”