I wouldn't have stood a chance in caucus vote: Kevin Rudd

Kevin Rudd says he accepts he won't be returning to the Labor leadership, following yesterday's failed coup. Picture: Getty Images Kevin Rudd says he was taken by surprise by Simon Crean's call for a leadership spill, which he did not contest. Picture: Lyndon Mechielsen 1

2

KEVIN Rudd says he didn't run for the Labor leadership because he was told there was "zero" chance of winning a caucus ballot.

The former prime minister today said he has abandoned all hope of reclaiming the Labor leadership, saying there are “no circumstances” in which he would ever contest the position again.

Mr Rudd's declaration came after he yesterday failed to contest a caucus leadership ballot called by Julia Gillard.

He told reporters in Brisbane that had he challenged he would have been attacked for going back on a promise made in February 2012 never to challenge again and “split the Labor Party right down the middle”.

He said he was advised in a meeting with supporters yesterday that he did not have a majority of votes.

“I asked them 'what are the prospects of us obtaining a significant majority' - their collective response was zero,” he said.

“I asked them `what are the prospects of us obtaining a majority' - to which their response was zero.”

Then, according to Mr Rudd, each told him: “Kevin I believe you should not run.”

Mr Rudd said he was taken by surprise by the move by frontbencher Simon Crean, who yesterday called on Ms Gillard to announce a leadership spill.

“I think few of us were expecting the spontaneous combustion of Simon Crean's statement yesterday, I certainly wasn't,” he said.

But politics was like that, a volatile business, he said.

“The time is now to bind up the wounds,” Mr Rudd said.

Mr Rudd said Mr Crean had “made up his own mind” in terms of talking to the Prime Minister and calling for the spill.

Mr Rudd said was time for the Labor party to “unite totally” behind Ms Gillard.

“Julia Gillard, has my 100 per cent support,” he said.

Mr Rudd's explanation came after three of his supporters today quit cabinet in the wake of yesterday's failed leadership coup.

In resigning as ministers, Chris Bowen, Martin Ferguson and Kim Carr followed Simon Crean, sacked yesterday after calling for the leadership spill.

Richard Marles last night resigned his position as Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs, while Ed Husic and Janelle Saffin resigned as whips.

Rudd plotter Joel Fitzgibbon did likewise, after earlier declaring he would consider his future for the next seven weeks.

Mr Crean said earlier today Mr Rudd had done the wrong thing by not contesting the caucus ballot.

“There's a right way and there's a wrong way. He took the wrong way.

“There was only one right way given what he and his team had put us through and he should have exercised it.”

Mr Crean said Ms Gillard was determined to win the election and she had his full support.

“She is a fighter,” he said.

“He (Kevin Rudd) didn't turn up for the fight.”

Mr Crean said he spoke to Mr Rudd in the caucus room.

“My only words to him were `You should have run',” he said.

Ms Gillard she was a “bit surprised” Mr Rudd didn't stand for the leadership, but having made his decision, her leadership had been emphatically confirmed.



