Jenkins announces retirement from politics

Updated

Retiring federal MP Harry Jenkins says he would have preferred to end his political career as parliamentary speaker.

Mr Jenkins has announced he is quitting politics at the next election after more than 26 years in parliament.

The member for the Victorian seat of Scullin stepped down as Speaker last year to make room for Peter Slipper, a move that gave Labor a buffer of one extra vote in the Lower House.

Mr Jenkins says some have described it as "taking a hit for the team" and concedes he would have liked to stay on as Speaker.

"I didn't dictate the result of the last election, and the fact that that had such a dramatic effect upon my personal ambitions I can't do anything about that," he said.

"I just have to make do with what has been provided. I'm very happy."

Mr Jenkins says he decided to make this his last term in Parliament after the 2010 election and nothing that has happened since then has changed his mind.

He denies he was pushed from his job as speaker to make way for Mr Slipper.

"It was something where the politician in me realised that the position of the Government was tenuous," he said.

"I'd already had an unnecessarily overly difficult feeling that here I was, the member for a seat where the vote for Labor was 72 per cent, and yet the Constitution meant that I didn't have a vote on the floor of the chamber."

He says he remains confident Labor will hang onto his seat at the next poll.

"In a seat like Scullin, I think, we've got a fairly solid performance as a government."

But he says it is now time to explore other aspects of life.

"I am pleased that I have been able to make this decision at a time of my choosing," he said.

"I have been fortunate to work with a wide range of people in Scullin to make a real difference.

"I have worked to ensure that the people of Scullin get their fair share of government investment.

"It has been a pleasure and an honour to serve my local community and, through the Parliament, the people of Australia."

Mr Jenkins informed Prime Minister Julia Gillard of his decision last night.

Ms Gillard says Mr Jenkins has a deep love for the Parliament and is devoted to his community.

He was elected in February 1986, replacing his father, Dr Harry Jenkins, who had been the member for Scullin since 1969.

He later followed in another set of his father's footsteps by becoming speaker when the Rudd government came to power.

When he stepped down last year he said he wanted to take part in policy debates.

The Opposition, however, argued a deal was done to install Mr Slipper who then quit the Liberal National Party and gave the Government a buffer of one extra vote in the Lower House.

Other Labor MPs retiring at the next election include the Member for Bendigo, Steve Gibbons, and the Member for Newcastle, Sharon Grierson.

Topics: alp, government-and-politics, federal-parliament, vic, epping-3076, lalor-3075, bundoora-3083, mill-park-3082, plenty-3090

First posted