Sabra Lane reported this story on Monday, August 15, 2011 12:14:00

ELEANOR HALL: A West Australian Liberal backbencher has labelled his party's decision to back a Royal Commission into the science of climate change as "stupid" and "ludicrous".



Dr Mal Washer is considered a moderate in his party and he told our chief political correspondent Sabra Lane that he's at a loss to explain why the party's state conference voted in favour of the motion.



SABRA LANE: Dr Washer, the Western Australian Liberal State Council on the weekend voted in favour of a Royal Commission on the climate change science. It was apparently overwhelmingly supported. Did that surprise you?



MAL WASHER: Yeah because it is a senseless and stupid thing to do. I mean I don't know why they did that and I don't know why it was overwhelmingly supported but if you think of what the mechanism of what a Royal Commission can do - and at the end of the day climate change science is based on a global initiative as you know and mainly on the international power of climate change scientists, which is quite a large group of scientists.



And overwhelmingly the majority of climate change scientists believe of course global warming is a reality.



I am convinced too that global warming is a reality and climate change is a reality so a Royal Commission is a ludicrous and silly thing to suggest. It will achieve nothing, cost the taxpayers money and I don't know who brought that up and I don't know who'd be silly enough to support it.



SABRA LANE: Well, it was overwhelmingly supported and the West Australian Premier Colin Barnett last week appealed to the party not to support it. He said he didn't think it was sensible.



MAL WASHER: Well, if Colin Barnett is sensible and Colin, he would find that absolutely silly and I find it absolutely silly too and Colin is a smart man and I support him in that totally.



SABRA LANE: What does it say about the party then?



MAL WASHER: Well look, I don't know how many were there when this, I was not there when this happened, right, so I don't know how many people were there and you can have a majority of 10 or 20 or 30, I don't know how many people were there.



Now there are a lot of people who are sceptical of course of this science right and I don't mind people being sceptical. I dislike deniers because I don't think they are thinkers but I'm not, any people being sceptical but that way of addressing a global scientific problem is ludicrous and stupid.



And I don't know how many people and why they did that so look Sabra, if you want me to give you a sensible answer why people act foolishly from time to time, I can't.



SABRA LANE: It is not official party policy but will that kind of vote harm the Liberals do you think?



MAL WASHER: Well, look I don't think that, I think that makes us look silly. The majority of people I know in the party are pretty sensible thinkers so I don't know how that slipped through. Whether they’re a bit battle fatigued at the end of the day or what happened to do that but look that does not represent the overall party's position. I'm sure it won't be embraced by us federally.



SABRA LANE: You've said, you've admitted that you didn't go to the conference on the weekend. A lot of people will ask well why didn't you go?



MAL WASHER: Well, because I was busy in the electorate and I couldn't get there.



SABRA LANE: There have been some critics within and outside the party who wonder why the Opposition Leader has described carbon dioxide as an invisible odourless weightless and tasteless substance. Why do you think he is describing ….



MAL WASHER: Look, Tony is not a scientist and to be fair to him, it is not weightless. We measured it. When you are going for emissions abatement you know we price it as a tonne of carbon dioxide or carbon dioxide equivalence.



In other words methane, nitrous oxide et cetera and other things that cause global warning or greenhouse gas emissions. So we measure it in a tonne so I would have thought you can't say something is weightless when we measure it by weight.



But look, I think that is just one of those omissions if you are not scientifically trained you can say these things.



SABRA LANE: You've announced that you are not going to stand at the next election, that you are going to retire.



MAL WASHER: Yep.



SABRA LANE: You're viewed as a moderate in the party, another moderate Judi Moylan is not standing either. Do you think that moderates will continue to have a strong influence in the party?



MAL WASHER: Well, I hope so because Sabra at the end of the day I love my party. I mean I think the Liberal Party is a great party.



I am not fond of conservative right and I think that’s well known. I have been a little critical and they are probably a little critical of me and that is fair enough. It is a wide spectrum party with differences but I certainly hope that Judi and I are replaced by moderates or moderate type thinkers.



I mean at the end of the day to win elections, we have got to appeal to the middle ground of voters or the middle ground of politics and I can assure you I know being a doctor of 41 years and having big medical centres right that the bulk of people I know are like me.



They are moderates. They are not right wing and they are not ultra conservative so if you are going to appeal to that majority of people, you have got to be similar to them.



ELEANOR HALL: Liberal MP Dr Mal Washer, speaking there with Sabra Lane.