Senators elected at last year’s federal election were sworn in this morning. The full effect of the 2013 Federal Election can now be seen in the balance of power in the upper house.

Thirty-six senators were chosen at the election on September 7, six from each State. They were sworn in during a 20-minute ceremony presided over by the Governor-General, Sir Peter Cosgrove.

Watch the swearing-in ceremony (20m)



One senator, Deborah O’Neill (ALP-NSW) was appointed to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Bob Carr. O’Neill had already filled the final months of Carr’s previous term, following her defeat as the member for Robertson in the House of Representatives.

There are 12 new senators, including 3 from the Palmer United Party, 2 from the Liberal National Party, 2 from the Australian Labor Party and 1 each from the Liberal Party, Liberal Democratic Party, Australian Motoring Enthusiast Party, Australian Greens and Family First.

For the first time since 2008, the ALP and the Greens have lost their majority control of the Senate. The Greens have lost their sole balance of power position and now share it with other parties and independents.

The government coalition of Liberal, LNP and Nationals holds 33 seats in the new Senate. It needs 6 extra votes to ensure passage of its motions and legislation. If support from the ALP and the Greens is not forthcoming, the government will need the support of the Palmer United Party and three other crossbenchers.

New Senators: Terms Commenced July 1, 2014; Terms End June 30, 2020 No. Name Party NEW SOUTH WALES 1. David Leyonhjelm Liberal Democratic Party VICTORIA 2. Ricky Muir Australian Motoring Enthusiast Party 3. Janet Rice Australian Greens QUEENSLAND 4. Matthew Canavan Liberal National Party 5. James McGrath Liberal National Party 6. Chris Ketter Australian Labor Party 7. Glenn Lazarus Palmer United Party WESTERN AUSTRALIA 8. Linda Reynolds Liberal Party 9. Joe Bullock Australian Labor Party 10. Zhenya Wang Palmer United Party SOUTH AUSTRALIA 11. Bob Day Family First TASMANIA 12. Jacqui Lambie Palmer United Party





The New Senate – from July 1, 2014 Party/Group No. Coalition – (Liberal, Nationals, CLP) 33 Australian Labor Party (ALP) 25 Australian Greens (AG) 10 Palmer United Party (PUP) 3 Democratic Labour Party (DLP) – John Madigan 1 Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) – David Leyonhjelm 1 Australian Motoring Enthusiast Party (AMEP) – Ricky Muir 1 Family First (FF) – Bob Day 1 Independent – Nick Xenophon 1 TOTAL 76





14-07-07_senate-seating-plan



