AEC confirms WA Senate election result, apologises over 1,375 lost ballots

Updated

The Australian Electoral Commissioner has declared the results of Western Australia's Senate election, despite admitting that it misplaced over 1,375 misplaced ballot papers.

WA's Electoral Officer Peter Kramer announced the re-count results today, giving the final two Senate spots to the Greens and the Australian Sports Party, instead of the Palmer United Party and the ALP.

The AEC has conceded that the ballot has left a "nagging and almost irreconcilable doubt" in the minds of voters, with Commissioner Ed Killesteyn telling Radio National Breakfast: "The gravity of this situation is not lost on me."

However, he says the Commission was legally obliged to officially declare the results of the ballot.

Greens Senator Scott Ludlum, who initially lost his seat, says he knows the result will be challenged in the High Court.

"Just to be clear I know that this result will be disputed in the Court of Disputed Returns and I think that is appropriate," he said.

Key points AEC apologises for botched WA Senate count

Says no choice but to announce result today

Result a near certainty to be subject to legal challenge

Any fresh election could be open to new candidates

Mr Killesteyn said: "Nearly 1,400 West Australian electors have had their Senate votes disenfranchised and I apologise unreservedly to all of those electors. We're left with a nagging and almost irreconcilable doubt about the outcome of the West Australian Senate election."

The declaration opens the way for a challenge in the High Court as the Court of Disputed Returns, with both Labor and Clive Palmer indicating they will protest against the result.

"This is really now a matter that has to be dealt with in the courts," Mr Killesteyn said.

"I'm obligated to declare the result, irrespective of the fact that these ballots are missing. Legally, I just have no other choice."

The re-count was prompted by the extremely close result in WA, which at one point had the distribution of preferences turning on a margin of just 14 votes.

WA Senate recount results David Johnston - Liberal Party Joe Bullock - Australian Labor Party Michaelia Cash - Liberal Party Linda Reynolds - Liberal Party Wayne Dropulich - Australian Sports Party Scott Ludlam - Greens

Both Mr Ludlam and the Australian Sports Party's Wayne Dropulich were edged out in the first vote and requested a fresh count.

That has resulted in victory for both candidates, who have been officially declared the winners of the final two spots at the cost of Labor's Louise Pratt and the Palmer United Party's (PUP) Dio Wang.

Ms Pratt has welcomed indications from the AEC that it will itself take the matter to the High court.

"A considerable challenge currently confronts our democratic process," she said.

"It is critical that we find a proper way to move forward and ensure a reliable, democratic outcome for the electors of Western Australia."

If a High Court challenge results in a fresh poll, the AEC's Peter Kramer says the state branch will be ready.

"We've basically tried over the last couple of years to be in a position where we constantly have our logistics lined up, have our process lined up and we will very quickly be in that position again," he said.

Meanwhile, WA's Special Minister of State Michael Ronaldson says there is no guarantee West Australians will be sent back to the polls.

"The High Court may well decide the first count will stand, they might say the second count can stand," he said

AEC dismisses Clive Palmer's corruption claims

Mr Killesteyn has dismissed claims by PUP leader Mr Palmer that the counting process had been corrupt, saying he has absolute "confidence" in his officers and their integrity.

"If there is evidence that Mr Palmer has available to him then he should provide it to the Australian Federal Police," he said.

The AEC has asked former AFP Commissioner Mick Keelty to investigate the loss of the ballot papers, but Mr Killesteyn is not hopeful the votes will ever be found.

"We've made extensive searches for these missing ballot papers," he said.

Assange to contest fresh vote





WikiLeaks says Julian Assange will contest any fresh election held for the WA Senate.



The party has also accused the AEC of discriminating against complainants.



Read more here. WikiLeaks says Julian Assange will contest any fresh election held for the WA Senate.The party has also accused the AEC of discriminating against complainants.

"Despite searching and researching of warehouses, counting centres, polling places, motor vehicles, the couriers that were involved, they've not been located, so I'm not holding out a lot of hope that we'll find them."

He said the AEC's "controls are good but in this case they failed".

"We'll look at Mr Keelty's report and make sure our procedures are made even tighter than they are," he added.

The missing votes were classified as 1,255 formal above-the-line ballots and 120 informal votes and were mostly from the electorate of Pearce, with some also from the division of Forrest.

Mr Killesteyn said the AEC would analyse what impact the votes may have had on the re-count as part of its own process of deciding whether it should also petition the High Court.

Constitutional expert Professor Anne Twomey says the AEC itself is likely to ask the High Court to have any re-run of the ballot completed before next July, when the Senate is due to change over.

"If it has doubts about the outcome, even if those doubts arise from errors that seem to have been made within the Commission perhaps in relation to these votes going missing, well it needs to be back on the front foot ensuring confidence in the system," she told ABC News Breakfast.

"I think that's one of the reasons it would take this sort of action."

New election could be 'open slather'

Professor Twomey says a fresh election could be open to new candidates.

"Unless the court finds some kind of over-riding requirement that this being a replacement election for the earlier one, you need to have the same candidates, etc, unless it did that ... it would be effectively open slather and anyone could nominate," she said.

Political analyst David Black agrees, adding that a fresh Senate election in Western Australia could lead to a very different result than that of the September general election.

"The way the preferences have been organised and the deals that have been done could very well change," said Mr Black, an Emeritus Professor at Curtin University in Perth.

"Even if you don't change the actual rules, it may mean that far more people vote below the line so that they themselves determine where their votes go rather than the way it's been ticked by everybody else."

The new Senate does not sit until July next year, so any new election could take place in February or March next year.

At the weekend, Federal Infrastructure Minister Warren Truss said this new election should be held sooner rather than later.

Any new campaign in Western Australia would be the first contest between Prime Minster Tony Abbott and the new Opposition Leader Bill Shorten.

The Liberals won three of six Senate spots in WA with the ALP holding just one - on the latest results.

Finance Minister and former WA Senator Matthias Cormann is already framing the potential by-election as "another referendum on the carbon tax".

"If there is another election in Western Australia it will be another opportunity for the people of Western Aust to send a strong and clear message to Bill Shorten that they want the carbon tax gone," he said.

"It will be another opportunity to have a referendum on the carbon tax which is hurting families and hurting the economy."

Meanwhile, Independent Senator Nick Xenophon says he'll try to rush in legislation to change the senate voting system ahead of any fresh poll, in an effort to stop parties with tiny proportions of the vote getting elected.

"That's something that I think most Australians really want as a result of some of the bizarre outcomes of this election," he said.

Topics: government-and-politics, elections, wa

First posted