Tony Abbott has issued a warning to the disparate group of senators likely to hold the balance of power that they should not try to stymie the Coalition's agenda.

SHARE

Share on Facebook SHARE

Share on Twitter TWEET

Link Prime Minister elect Tony Abbott arrives in Canberra. Photo: Andrew Meares

The prime minister-elect also said he supported change to tackle the Senate voting process after micro party candidates in WA, Victoria and NSW look likely to be elected under complex preference deals.

Mr Abbott said his job was to be ''respectful and courteous'' to all members of Parliament, including minor party MPs.

''But in the end I think they all need to respect the government of our nation has a mandate and the Parliament should work with the government of the day to implement its mandate,'' he told Fairfax Radio on Monday morning.

''The people voted for change and change they will get and I'm determined to ensure that the Parliament delivers them the change that they want.''

Advertisement

Asked about the make-up of the new Senate beginning in July, which is likely to include several minor parties that attracted very small levels of primary support, Mr Abbott said he supported change to address the Senate voting process, adding that many people who voted for the Liberal Democratic Party for the NSW Senate may have thought they were voting for the Liberal Party.

Liberal Democratic Party candidate David Leyonhjelm appears likely to win a NSW Senate spot.

Other micro party candidates likely to get elected include Victorian Ricky Muir representing the Motoring Enthusiasts Party and Wayne Dropulich from the Australian Sports Party.

''I think this is an issue, and I think it will have to be addressed,'' Mr Abbott said. But he said it should be considered after Parliament's Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters completed its usual post-election inquiry.

Mining magnate Clive Palmer and two candidates from his Palmer United Party are also set to enter Parliament in the House of Representatives and Senate respectively.

Asked for his response to the possible election of Mr Palmer in the Queensland seat of Fairfax, Mr Abbott said: ''Everyone who gets elected to represent 100,000 of his or her fellow Australians should be treated with a modicum of respect. I think once you're in the parliament it's important then to earn the respect of your colleagues and let's see how every member of the parliament does that.''

Mr Abbott said his government was likely to be sworn in early next week as he said time was needed to formalise the coalition agreement between the Liberals and The Nationals, for the party rooms to meet to confirm the leadership teams and for the ministry to be chosen.

Mr Abbott said Parliament could resume as soon as next month.

''It will be back toward the end of October, early November,'' he said.

Mr Abbott said he didn't want to recall Parliament until new legislation, particularly to repeal the carbon tax, is ready.

''The last thing I want to do is to rush the Parliament back for a photo opportunity before the substance of the work is there for it to do,'' he said.

He is also in no rush to move out of his move out of his family home in the Sydney suburb of Forestville and would take the advice of officials on where to live.

Mr Abbott said he understood the prime minister's Canberra residence, The Lodge, was under renovation and may not be ready for occupation for some time.

''I'm in no rush to move out of Forestville and I don't think the family is either,'' Mr Abbott said.

''Forestville is where we've lived very happily for the last 20 years.''

But Mr Abbott said for security reasons he might need to move into one of the the Prime Minister's official residences either The Lodge or Kirribilli House on Sydney Harbour.

Mr Abbott touched down in Canberra on Monday morning for more meetings with officials and his senior leadership team, including Nationals leader Warren Truss and Liberal deputy Julie Bishop.

Outgoing prime minister Kevin Rudd is expected to welcome Mr Abbott to The Lodge at some stage later in the week.