Abbott promises not to shut down Labor's Medicare Locals during Rooty Hill debate with Rudd

Updated

The final leaders' debate of the federal election campaign has been marked by a new healthcare pledge from Tony Abbott and a shift from Kevin Rudd on foreign investment policy.

The two leaders also clashed over the Coalition's policy costings and planned budget cuts in their third and final face-to-face encounter.

The Opposition Leader and Prime Minister went head to head at the Rooty Hill RSL Club in western Sydney - an area rich with marginal seats that are mostly held by the ALP.

With just nine days to go until polling day, the debate was guided by questions from undecided voters, with a focus on the state of the economy and some pointed references to the touchy subject of Mr Rudd's leadership battles with former PM Julia Gillard.

Mr Rudd continued his pursuit of the Opposition Leader over the issue of budget cuts, accusing Mr Abbott of preparing to close Medicare Locals.

Mr Abbott shook his head and said: "We are not shutting any Medicare Locals."

It was the first time the Opposition Leader had promised the healthcare hubs would not be closed down under a Coalition government.

Set up two years ago, Medicare Locals coordinate primary health services, such as after-hours GP clinics, and employ more than 3,000 health workers.

Just last week, Mr Abbott would not guarantee the services would survive a Coalition review.

"I'm not going to say no Medicare Local will close, but I am giving an absolute commitment that the overall levels of health funding will be maintained," he said last Thursday.

Mr Abbott's health spokesman, Peter Dutton, has been highly critical of the initiative in the past.

Mr Rudd responded doubtfully to the assurances from the Opposition Leader.

"That is the first time I ever heard that, because the health spokesman Mr Dutton has said the reverse," he said.

"We need to be very careful about what's real and what's not here.

"Mr Dutton has been saying this from day dot and he runs the alternative health portfolio for the Opposition."

Rudd signals shift in foreign investment stance

But Mr Rudd has also signalled a potential shift in Labor policy on the issue of foreign investment, saying he is a "bit old-fashioned on these questions" and favours "joint venture approaches".

"Maybe it's because I grew up on a farm, I'm not sure," he told the crowd at Rooty Hill.

"But I am a bit nervous, a bit anxious frankly about simply an open slather on this.

"I think when it comes to rural land, but land more generally we perhaps need to adopt a more cautious approach."

Mr Abbott spelt out the Coalition policy to reduce the threshold for consideration of purchases by the foreign investment review board from $200 million to $15 million.

Rudd spruiks economic record, presses Abbott on costings

Mr Rudd also spruiked his economic record, recalling when he "first became Prime Minister we had this huge challenge called the global financial crisis".

"I used to wake up each morning quite frightened by it all," he said of the time.

He went on to add: "I believe we still are in uncertain times."

Mr Abbott stressed the Coalition's pledge to scrap the carbon tax and to run a government that will "live within its means".

On the Rudd government's handling of the global financial crisis, he harked back to Labor's leadership ructions.

"It's really I guess a challenge to Mr Rudd - if his management of the global financial crisis was so outstanding, why did his own party sack him in June of 2010?" Mr Abbott asked.

Mr Rudd responded: "Well, Tony, that's a question I'm sure you could put to half a dozen folks who would would give you a few different answers."

"And I think Malcolm Turnbull has had a few chips at you over the years, mate," he said.

Mr Rudd pressed the Opposition leader to release the full details of the costs of Coalition policies.

"My challenge 10 days before an election to Mr Abbott is - with 200 policies Mr Hockey said today out there costed by the Liberal Party internally - why are not any of those out there for people to scrutinise, because they want to know where all the cuts are going to come from?" he said.

Opposition outlines $13 billion in cuts

Mr Abbott pointed to the release, earlier today, of the announcement of an additional $13 billion in cuts the Coalition would make if it won on September 7.

"No cuts to health, no cuts to education, no cuts or changes to pension, no changes to the GST and frankly, what Mr Rudd is peddling in terms of cuts is simply untrue," the Opposition Leader said.

Today's savings details come in addition to almost $18 billion worth of cuts and efficiencies that the Coalition had previously announced.

Frankly, what Mr Rudd is peddling in terms of cuts is simply untrue. Tony Abbott

The new money is mostly found through scrapping measures associated with the mining tax (MRRT), including the small business instant asset write-off, which will save $2.9 billion, and a scheme that allowed businesses to claim losses against previous tax paid, which will save $900 million over the forward estimates.

Last week, the two leaders faced off in a similar forum in central Brisbane.

That encounter will be remembered for a pointed aside from Mr Abbott, who asked of his opponent "Does this guy ever shut up?", and for a complaint about Mr Rudd's behaviour that was briefly posted on Facebook by the event's makeup artist.

Where the Coalition will save $31.5 billion Discontinuing the School Kids Bonus - $4 billion

Reducing public service head count by natural attrition by 12,000 - around $5 billion

Two year delay in phasing of superannuation increase from 9 to 12 per cent - $2.1 billion

Discontinue low income super contribution - $2.9 billion

Rescind increase in humanitarian intake - $1.3 billion

Discontinue supplementary allowance to unemployed, students and parents - $1 billion

Scrapping Clean Energy Finance Corporation - $1.6 billion

Paid parental leave (PPL) scheme, which would replace existing programs - $1.1 billion

Abolition of Minerals Resource Rent Tax (MRRT) and associated costs - nearly $5 billion

Dumping carbon tax, which would include ending associated programs - $7.5 billion

(Estimated savings over four years of forward estimates as released by the Coalition.) (Estimated savings over four years of forward estimates as released by the Coalition.)

Topics: federal-elections, government-and-politics, federal-government, alp, political-parties, liberals, health, rooty-hill-2766, nsw, australia

First posted