The fallout from Labor's leadership switch continues, with Defence Minister Stephen Smith announcing that he will quit politics at the next election.

Mr Smith has held the seat of Perth for two decades but says that is long enough.

"This is something that I cannot in all good conscience say to the people of Perth that I can continue to do win lose or draw at the next election for another three years," he told Parliament.

"Twenty years I can do, 23 years I can't."

Mr Smith says he will continue on as Defence Minister under Kevin Rudd's leadership until the next election.

He says the dramatic events of the past two days have given him the "clarity of thought" to make the decision to go.

"Can I thank the House for the way in which they have dealt with me over the years - sometimes harshly, most times benevolently," Mr Smith said.

"Can I also say that I'm very grateful to two prime ministers - Prime Minister Rudd and prime minister Gillard - for the opportunity that they have given me to serve."

Mr Rudd has thanked Mr Smith for his contribution, describing him as a first class Labor warrior.

Mr Rudd revealed his Cabinet colleagues liked to make fun of Mr Smith's methodical nature.

"He has this impeccably organised set of papers which basically organised like this and there is not a centimetre out of place," Mr Rudd said.

"So when he goes up and goes out of the room to get a sandwich or a drink, the thing you do is just twist it slightly and when he comes back he's entire visual universe is turned on its head."

Smith praises Defence chiefs

Mr Smith has been Defence Minister since 2010 and was foreign affairs minister in the Labor Government's first term.

In Opposition he held several shadow portfolios including health, communications and immigration.

He is also a former state secretary of the ALP in Western Australia.

Mr Smith has praised the defence chiefs he worked with - Angus Houston and David Hurley.

"I have as an individual defence minister on my watch seen more deaths than an Australian minister for defence since Vietnam," he said.

"It's at those moments when you look into the chief's eyes and you see the integrity, the decency and the commitment of those two individuals and they are both Australians of whom we can be proud."

Mr Smith is the fourth Labor minister to announce their resignation since Mr Rudd reclaimed the leadership.

The woman he overthrew, Julia Gillard, and her allies Craig Emerson and Peter Garrett will also leave Parliament at the election.

Political commentator Peter Kennedy says Mr Smith will be able to reflect on his Parliamentary career with pride.

"Stephen Smith has been the consummate politician. Very well prepared, very well thought out," he said.

"Rather risk averse, but I think his achievements over the past 20 years speak for themselves.

"He's been a successful West Australian politician."

Perth barrister Tim Hammond contested the seat of Swan at the 2010 election but lost to the Liberal's Steve Irons.

The ABC understands Mr Hammond is consulting his family about whether to run for Mr Smith's seat.