Bitter dispute erupts over Senate preferences in Queensland

Updated

A bitter and highly personal dispute has erupted between a Queensland Senate hopeful and a political consultant known as "the Preference Whisperer".

While the major parties and their leaders slug it out for precious face-time and air-time with the voters, a less high-profile but very torrid battle is unfolding in various Senate races around the country.

It is a fight not between the major parties, but between a myriad of so-called micro parties.

These are parties with few followers and their candidates are largely unknown, but the Australian electoral system gives them a crack at a Senate seat with sometimes miniscule votes.

Electors on Saturday have a choice of picking a single party above the line in the Senate ballot, or preferencing the jumble of parties below the line. A vote above the line allows the parties themselves to determine preferences.

Candidates live or die on the number preference swaps and deals they can negotiate. For micro parties it can be a daunting prospect.

Cracks appear in minor party alliance

Dr Patricia Petersen is one such candidate standing for the Australian Independents, and entered into an agreement with a group of minor parties.

The so-called "minor party alliance" was formed by self-styled political consultant and preference whisperer Glenn Druery.

Dr Petersen says her agreement was simple.

"The arrangement was, the Shooters and Fishers would directly preference the Australian Independents in Queensland in exchange for Australian Independents directly preferencing Shooters and Fishers in NSW and WA," she said.

However, cracks started to appear in the alliance soon after.

"As it turns out we stuck to our end of the agreement and honoured it," Dr Peterson said.

"But unfortunately Glen Druery and Shooters and Fishers didn't honour their part of the arrangement."

Dr Petersen sent a group email to the other members of the alliance detailing her concerns.

Mr Druery's response was swift. In a recorded message on her mobile phone he demanded Dr Petersen stop talking about her preference arrangements and ended the message saying:

"Cease immediately or I will have a writ up your arse so quick you won't see the f***ing sunshine, lady."

Dr Petersen now regrets her involvement.

"I think it is even more disgusting that you would phone a woman use that sort of language and physically and emotionally threaten her," she said.

"I didn't know Glenn Druery before I went to one of the meetings in Sydney.

"Had I done a bit more homework, a bit more research on Mr Druery, perhaps I wouldn't have become involved in the minor party alliance."

Glen Druery: the preference broker

Mr Druery is a paid by the Shooters and Fishers Party to broker preference deals for them. It is alleged that the Australian Fishing and Lifestyle Party and the Victorian Family First candidate Ashley Fenn are also clients.

Mr Fenn confirmed to the ABC he had "previously paid" Mr Druery.

Other minor parties who also had contact with Mr Druery have told the ABC they opted not to become involved with the alliance because they were uncomfortable with the various preference swaps.

Mark Farrell from the Democratic Labor Party did not want to be part of the alliance and says the arrangements are undemocratic.

"If parties preference parties they're not aligned to, in the end their members who join their party for a reason will decide not to keep following that party because the people they perference should be somewhat like-minded," he said.

"Parties who take opportunist routes in the end don't last the distance."

In May this year, Mr Druery invited some 40 minor parties to attend a meeting in Sydney to discuss how preference flows could help them.

Those who attended that meeting and three subsequent meetings came from across the political spectrum.

From the Sex Party to the Australian Christians and the Motor Enthusists Party, the common thread was they were short on funds and contacts - and most were looking for some networking opportunities.

Mr Druery declined repeated requests for an interview and has refused to comment about the dispute with Dr Petersen.

Full list of parties in Minor Party Alliance

Senator Online | Australian Voice Party | Australian Fishing and Lifestyle Party | Family First | Stable Population Party | Party for Freedom | Australia First Party | Sex Party | WikiLeaks | Animal Justice Party | Stop CSG Party | Help End Marijuana Prohibition [HEMP] Party | Voluntary Euthanasia Party | Single Parents Party | Building Australia Party | Natural Medicine Party | Australian Independents Party | Climate Sceptics Party | Shooters and Fishers Party | One Nation | Australian Democrats (Darren Churchill) | Bullet Train for Australia Party | Bank Reform Party

:: Do you know more? investigations@abc.net.au

Topics: event, federal-election, government-and-politics, elections, federal-elections, qld

First posted