Labor Party campaign launch to focus on jobs, small businesses and skills

Updated

Prime Minister Kevin Rudd will unveil new measures to help small business owners and apprentices at the Labor launch later today in Brisbane.

In a city deemed crucial by both major parties to their success at this Saturday's election, the Prime Minister will tell party faithful and elders that the ALP is focussed on jobs and skills.

When he takes to the stage at the Brisbane Convention and Exhibition Centre, Mr Rudd will announce new rules to increase work opportunities for apprentices on commonwealth government building contracts and other projects with more than 50 per cent commonwealth funding.

On projects worth more than $5 million, the new rules will stipulate that 10 per cent of the total hours worked must be worked by apprentices.

The Labor Party will also announce a strengthening of the TAFE system, though the details have not yet been released.

And in a policy targeting small business owners, Mr Rudd will unveil a multi-million-dollar temporary tax measure the government says will give operators "a shot in the arm".

The Small Business Investment Boost will allow more than 3 million businesses to claim a tax deduction for new assets worth up to $10,000 and will come into effect the day after the election if Labor wins, and expire on June 30, 2015.

During that time it will replace the current small business Instant Asset Write-Off which the Government increased to $6,500 last year as part of its mining tax package.

The Coalition has announced it will dump the Instant Asset Write-off measure if it wins, and Labor's announcement will again highlight that policy difference.

The Government says the Investment Boost will cost $200 million over the four years of the forward estimates.

Labor tries to put focus on jobs

Speaking ahead of the launch, Mr Rudd said his "core message" would focus on Labor's efforts to create and protect jobs.

"Our core message to the Australian people is that we are building the economy and jobs of the future and protecting those jobs for the future," he said yesterday.

"Mr Abbott is cutting those jobs and schools and hospitals for the future and won't tell us how much. "

Former Queensland premier Peter Beattie, who is running for the seat of Forde in the election, says a focus on jobs will help the party woo voters.

"They want constructive policies. It's about our future," he told Channel Seven.

"[In Queensland] we've had some economic issues. We need jobs and we need prosperity."

Despite grim poll results for Labor, Mr Beattie is staying positive about the upcoming vote.

"I know the polls are not good, we're not stupid. If the election was yesterday of course I would have lost," he said.

"But I'm a fighter, Kevin Rudd's a fighter, and we're going to work our hearts out until next Saturday night.

"We've got a week to fight, and we'll just have to worry about things as they unfold."

He says today's campaign launch could turn the party's fortunes around.

"Today really has to be a circuit-breaker for us," he said.

"A lot will depend on Kevin's performance, if he can do a good launch, and Bob Hawke coming down to Forde. Today could be a circuit breaker and a turning point."

Gillard will not attend launch

But, inevitably, some of the focus will fall on the notable absence of former prime minister Julia Gillard, who released a statement earlier this week explaining why she would not attend the launch.

"I simply do not want to distract in any way from Kevin Rudd's powerful message to the Australian people," the statement from Ms Gillard said.

"I stand with all those throughout our party and with our great candidates in voicing my fervent hope for a decisive ALP victory on September 7."

Mr Rudd was again asked yesterday about his predecessor's decision.

"I understand her reasons for being where she will be tomorrow and certainly I will continue to acknowledge her role," he said.

"I'm in the business of acknowledging all the strong, positive contributions of those who have gone before me."

Another notable absence is Treasurer Chris Bowen, who is in danger of losing his seat of McMahon in western Sydney, currently on a margin of 7.8 per cent.

A spokesperson has told the ABC that Mr Bowen had longstanding commitments to attend important community functions in his electorate today.

Of the man who was once treasurer under both Mr Rudd and Ms Gillard, Wayne Swan, Mr Rudd said he was "uncertain as to what role" he would have in the launch.

Mr Swan resigned as treasurer when Mr Rudd seized back the Prime Minister's job, and is now fighting to retain his north Brisbane seat of Lilley.

The Coalition launched its campaign in Brisbane last weekend.

Topics: federal-elections, elections, alp, political-parties, government-and-politics, apprenticeships, education, small-business, business-economics-and-finance, brisbane-4000, qld, australia

First posted