In 2010, Australia endured a federal election campaign so riven with rancour and devoid of meaningful policy debate that the paucity of clear choice resulted in a hung parliament. It was widely condemned as the worst campaign in living memory. The Sunday Age laments that the 2013 campaign has not been much better.

What happened in the wake of 2010 was a sustained assault on the Gillard government by the opposition. It was a de facto three-year campaign, marked by a fragile minority government and by Labor's convulsive internal ructions that ended in Kevin Rudd's re-ascension to the prime ministership. This political instability was fuelled by an eager opposition, its leader Tony Abbott's combative style and the insatiable demands of the 24-hour news cycle. Mr Abbott's carpet-bombing on asylum-seeker policy, ''bad'' taxes and the trustworthiness of Australia's first female prime minister further undermined the effectiveness of the government. His messages resonated, his party united strongly behind him. In the end, Mr Rudd's supporters got their way.

This did not prevent the Gillard government from achieving some strong policy outcomes: DisabilityCare, paid parental leave, a price on carbon and an economy that has grown, on average, 2.5 per cent a year since 2007. The disability insurance scheme, in particular, may well become a legacy reform for Labor, as profound as universal healthcare. Our most vulnerable people have finally been championed, and for that Labor is to be congratulated.

Such policies of quality, though, have been eclipsed by a litany of Labor failures - or perceived failures. These include the government's inability to stem the tide of asylum seekers, cost-of-living pressures and a manufacturing sector struggling to compete under a high Australian dollar and rising costs. Labor also became weighed down by scandals involving the now independent MP Craig Thomson, the AWU and corruption in the NSW branch - and by its misjudged pledge on a budget surplus. Fearing an electoral wipeout under Ms Gillard, the party returned to Mr Rudd. And so the game rebooted - old opponents squared up again, and the campaign proper finally began.

So what have we learnt in the past four weeks? Very little, unfortunately. A genuine contest of ideas has not materialised - the electorate has instead received a pallid alternative, cloaked in fear campaigns, opportunism and slogans.

To some degree, education and parental leave are exceptions. The Sunday Age has concerns about the Coalition's $9.8 billion paid parental leave scheme - on the issues of affordability, inequality and the capacity for rorting by small business. Labor's big school reform package - $15 billion extra over the next six years - is to be applauded for targeting disadvantage. The Coalition, after long denying the school funding system was broken, has promised to honour signed agreements and to match Labor's offer for at least four years.