High Court judge reserves judgment on botched West Australian Senate election

Updated

West Australian voters will have to wait to find out if they will have to return to the polls in a new Senate election.

High Court Justice Kenneth Hayne has reserved his decision in a Court of Disputed Returns hearing in Melbourne.

Over two days, the court heard submissions on a petition by the Australian Electoral Commission to have last year's election declared void.

The Commission believes the election was rendered illegal because more than 1,000 votes were lost in the counting.

The court heard without the ballot papers there could be no scrutiny.

Lawyers for both the Commission and the Greens told the court there could be no just result in the current circumstances.

The problem emerged after an initial count delivered the fifth and sixth positions to Labor's Louise Pratt and the Palmer United Party's Zheng Wang.

The Green's Scott Ludlam and the Australian Sports Party's Wayne Dropulich challenged the result.

More than 1,000 votes lost

The first request for a recount was denied, but a later appeal succeeded and it was then that it was discovered 1,370 votes had been lost in the process.

The result was determined by preferences from minor parties and the margins were extremely narrow, a factor which changed the outcome, and in the Commission's view justifies a new election.

The court was asked to consider three key questions: Were those who lodged the lost ballot papers prevented from voting; should information about the original poll be allowed in any fresh determination of the poll and could there be a re-examination of more than 100 votes declared invalid by the Commission during counting?

There was disagreement about the definition of how voters are prevented from voting, with the Liberal party saying once voters have cast their vote, the deed is done and whether it is an effective vote is irrelevant.

Counsel representing the Liberal Party Stephen Donaghue told the court "the question is not about the effect, it's about whether you put it in the box".

Both major parties have also suggested the poll could be determined without a new election, by referring to the information known about the votes that were lost.

Mr Donaghue told the court only 23 of the lost votes bore an effect on the actual result.

With Labor, the Liberals also believe the informal votes should be exposed to challenge in any recount.

Their argument is that enough formal votes to determine the outcome could be gleaned from that process, avoiding the need to scrutinise the missing votes.

One lawyer pointed out to the Judge the unfairness to candidates and voters of a new election.

Justice Hayne told the court he did not need to be told of the gravity of a decision which would void an election.

Other than making way for a new election, he has several options, including alternative ways to determine the result and a reference to the full bench of the High court.

It is not known when a result will be announced.

Topics: federal-elections, courts-and-trials, perth-6000, melbourne-3000

First posted