Ed Killesteyn resigns as Australian Electoral Commissioner

Updated

Australian Electoral Commissioner Ed Killesteyn has resigned following a major bungle at the last election which will see a fresh Senate poll held in Western Australia.

Mr Killesteyn had been the Electoral Commissioner since 2009 and had been reappointed to the role for another five years beginning last month.

But his long career in the public service was tainted by the AEC's loss of more than 1,300 Senate ballot papers in Western Australia following the September poll.

The mistake will see West Australians head back to the polls to elect six senators at a fresh vote before July, possibly as early as April.

AEC WA state manager Peter Kramer has also quit.

In a statement, Special Minister of State Michael Ronaldson says Mr Killesteyn has formally tendered his resignation to the Governor-General.

"Mr Killesteyn has had a long and distinguished career in the public service and I wish him well for the future," Senator Ronaldson said in the statement.

Mr Killesteyn has been on personal leave and will not return to his job, even though his resignation does not take effect until July 4.

The Government says Deputy Electoral Commissioner Tom Rogers will act in the top job until a new commissioner is appointed.

Gary Gray, the Member for Brand in Western Australia, said Mr Killesteyn's service was of the "highest calibre".

"The last months have been a difficult time, and Mr Killesteyn handled them with great integrity and with a concern for the proper functioning of the Electoral Act," he said in a statement.

"It is my understanding that Mr Killesteyn had always intended to leave his role prior to the next election due in 2016."

Senator Ronaldson says the AEC needs to regain the confidence of the public.

"The Government will in due course announce a new electoral commissioner who will be charged with the restoration of that confidence," the Minister said.

On Thursday, the High Court ruled that WA would go back to the polls after September's result was declared void.

The only precedent was in 1907 in South Australia when there was a re-vote for a single Senate position.

The AEC had petitioned the court asking for the Senate results to be discounted after 1,370 votes could not be found for a recount.

That original count resulted in success for three Liberal candidates, two from Labor and one from the PUP.

However, the closeness of the count in the final two seats won narrowly by Labor's Louise Pratt and the PUP's Zhenya "Dio" Wang, resulted in a challenge by Senator Ludlam and Mr Dropulich, and a recount was ordered.

On the recount, which excluded the missing ballot papers, Senator Ludlam and Mr Dropulich won the spots.

Justice Kenneth Hayne found "the only relief appropriate is for the election to be declared void" because the loss of the ballot papers had prevented electors from voting.

Topics: elections, government-and-politics, australia, wa

First posted