The man behind the controversial success of the Australian Motoring Enthusiast party and the Australian Sports party at last weekend’s election has called for reforms to how parties are registered to make sure only “real parties” are able to stand.

Ricky Muir of the Motoring Enthusiast party looks set to win the sixth Senate spot in Victoria, while Wayne Dropulich of the Sports party seems likely to gain the fifth Senate spot in Western Australia. In both cases the parties won minuscule shares of the primary vote but gained enough additional votes through the preference system to find themselves elevated to the upper house.

Glenn Druery, the political consultant known as the “preference whisperer”, has been given the credit – or the blame – for the parties’ success, for his role advising minor parties to make a series of preference deals.

In the wake of the election, calls have grown for reform of the Senate voting system.

But Druery told Guardian Australia that the true solution to the problem was to change the way parties were registered.

“I think, for democracy to work, everybody needs to have a say and be able to get elected; that’s fair and that’s reasonable,” he said. “I do think there needs to be reform of how political parties are registered, absolutely I do. At the moment, the reason we have so many groups registered is because forming a party is so easy. Having said that, we shouldn’t make forming a party beyond the means of [the average person].”

Druery said people could establish a party by setting up a Facebook page with “glossy photos” and “some spin” and a link to a website urging people to sign up.

After they signed their names as a member, there was no need for them to be active in the party, he said.

“One reform I would make is to make the parties so they are real, increase membership from 500 to 1,000 or more, 1,500 perhaps, and sign up in the old-fashioned way with a piece of paper stating that ‘I am a member of the party’ and you have to show you have regular party meetings, you have to show office bearers, treasurers, secretaries,” he said. “You’ve got to be a real party, in other words.”

This “small modification” would result in the number of parties on the now-lengthy Senate ballot papers dropping from dozens to “probably 10 or 12” – ”and if you’re fair dinkum about it, you’ll still be able to have a crack at entering the political process.”

ABC election analyst Antony Green has said that the series of deals Druery advocated made a “joke” of Australia’s democratic system. Druery has brushed off such criticism.

“I don’t need to answer criticisms,” he said. “I didn’t establish this – other people did. I don’t need to answer that,” he said.

“I like to use the analogy of: I can drive down the highway at 100 kilometres per hour because that’s the law and if someone criticises me for driving at 100 km/h in a 100km/h zone, I don’t need to answer that because I’m not doing anything wrong. I’m obeying the law.”

Druery met up with what he calls “the minor party alliance” about four times and explained to them how preferences work and how best to maximise their chances of getting elected.

He said he was surprised by the success of the Motoring Enthusiast party and the Sports party as they came to his alliance so late they did not attend any of the meetings.

Instead, he gave the parties advice over the phone and says they followed the principles he set out “to the letter”.

He says when he saw the group voting tickets he knew immediately the Motoring Enthusiast and Sports parties had a strong chance of gaining Senate seats.

“I’ve subsequently spoken to a whole bunch of others who preferenced them and they all say the same thing: ‘We didn’t think that would amount to anything because they didn’t know anything; we thought they’d pull a few primary votes and then fall over so we did deals with them,’” he said.

“They were underestimated by enough people that once they both got started it was like a snowball and they gathered everybody.”

Druery says the Motoring Enthusiast and Sports parties were not paying clients and he gave them the advice for free, although he refuses to divulge how much money he makes from advising and which parties are his paying clients.

“I don’t necessarily share the politics of many of these groups but I am a firm believer that we all have something in common, and I think when we can determine what that is and focus on the positives then we can do business,” he said.

“We can make things happen. I don’t mean business in a [money]making sense, but [moving] things forward.”

Read more: Gabrielle Chan profiles the new Senate crossbenchers.