Australian Sports Party 'pleasantly surprised' by potential Senate seat

Updated

The Australian Sports Party, which is tipped to win a place in the Senate, concedes it has a lot to learn.

As a result of preferences, the little-known party is predicted to gain a seat in the Senate despite polling just 0.22 per cent of the initial vote.

Counting is still continuing but the party's Senate candidate, Wayne Dropulich, a former Australian grid-iron representative player, says the result has come as a pleasant surprise.

"It's a bit of a process now, probably a week or so before we find out whether it does actually come to fruition or not and once that happens I think it's going to be a long process of trying to understand exactly what's involved with being in politics," he said.

"Obviously this is my first time so there's a lot of things I don't know yet so I'll work through them as we go."

On his party's website, the pitch for votes is predominantly anti-politics.

"Are you more interested in sport than politics?" it asks, before proclaiming: "Then the Australian Sports Party is for you."

However Mr Dropulich is not trivialising the matter.

"I didn't say 'me', I said 'everyone else'.

"So if anyone else out there wasn't interested in politics, you know, and a lot of people are interested in sport, you know, hopefully we can use a position in politics to help promote sport and make sport more accessible to people and more enjoyable for people and easy to get involved with sport."

"And that's our sort of goal."

Democracy in action

Mr Dropulich has defended the Senate voting process that could see his party gain a seat thanks to preferences, while major parties miss out.

"We play to a system that the government has set up there and so we're playing by the rules and everyone's playing by the same rules so maybe they should have played to the rules better."

And he has been backed up by experts who says the system is fair.

Political consultant Glenn Druery has a long history of helping independents and has been advising many of the micro parties on how to maximise their vote.

"I think it's a good thing for democracy when small groups and when community groups can have their say through the political process," Mr Druery said.

"Let's not forget that the minor parties did not invent the system. This system was invented by the major parties to keep small parties out.

"I don't think that they ever really figured out that somebody would learn how to use the system."

Mr Druery says people that create micro parties such as the Australian Sports Party are passionate people who care about their community and that can only be a good thing.

Topics: political-parties, federal-election, federal-elections, perth-6000

First posted