THE two vacant spots on the Queensland Liberal National Party (LNP) Senate ticket should go to women, retiring senator Sue Boyce says.

Senator Boyce, the only female Queensland LNP representative in the upper house, has announced she will not contest another term because she wants to spend more time with family.

Her term expires on June 30, 2014.

There are now two vacancies on the LNP Senate ticket with veteran Ron Boswell already flagging his retirement.

"There's no reason why both those positions couldn't go to women," Senator Boyce told the Courier-Mail on Monday.

Senator Boyce says her party is failing to attract enough female talent but does not believe Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has a problem with women - no matter what Labor says.

But if he recruited more women it "could help tackle that perception", she said.

She urged the LNP to set a 30 per cent female candidate target within 10 years and recruit more small business operators.

"I don't see tokenism as playing any role in this whatsoever," Senator Boyce told ABC Radio in Brisbane.

"I think if we're not getting enough women of merit putting their hands up ... then we need to think about what's wrong with our preselection process and our selection process, rather than saying, 'Well, what's wrong with women'."

Mr Abbott told reporters in Melbourne he was "very confident" the coalition would have more women after the next election.

Senator Boyce also took a swipe at the growing number of conservatives within the coalition, saying they were not prepared to accept diverse views.

"We've got to make sure we stay a broad church," she told the Courier-Mail.

Senator Boyce has been accused of being too moderate by some in the LNP who cite her decision to cross the floor on Labor's failed carbon pollution reduction scheme and during parliamentary debate in September breaking coalition ranks by supporting gay marriage.

South Australian Liberal senator Simon Birmingham said his colleague has been a "a champion of classical liberal values" and he would miss her greatly.

LNP president Bruce McIver said Senator Boyce had served Queensland well and been a strong advocate for disability and business.

"Throughout her parliamentary career, Senator Boyce has always stood up for what she believes in and she has travelled the state standing up for others in her role as senator," Mr Mciver said in a statement.

The LNP Queensland Senate nominations closed on Monday and preselection will be on November 24.