Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has tried to silence one of his MPs who entered negotiations with the Government for the job of Deputy Speaker.

Queensland Liberal Alex Somlyay confirmed yesterday that an offer had been made for him to be the Government's preferred nominee.

Mr Abbott's office later issued a statement under Mr Somlyay's name saying he rejected the offer because it meant he would have to support the Government over no-confidence motions and budget supply Bills.

''I have declined this approach,'' the statement said.

''I have been a proud member of the Liberal Party Room for 21 years and my commitment to serve the Liberal-National Party remains strong.''

But last night Mr Somlyay dissociated himself from that statement, telling Sky News he was keen to make the contribution as Deputy Speaker because this would be his last term in office.

The MP, who suffers serious health problems, plans to retire at the next election and said he would be willing to support the Government on confidence and money Bills in return for the deputy speakership.

A senior Government source told The Canberra Times the ''deal had been done'' and regardless of what the Opposition Leader was saying, Mr Somlyay was ''on board'' and willing to become Deputy Speaker.

Mr Abbott did not respond to the allegation that he had put words into Mr Somlyay's mouth.

Labor's Harry Jenkins will return to Parliament next week as Speaker of the House of Representatives, after the Government broke the deadlock with the Opposition and nominated him yesterday.

But Labor needs an Opposition MP as the Deputy Speaker to balance the vote it will lose to the Speaker's chair.

To do that the Government also needs a ''pairing'' arrangement in place between the Speaker and the deputy.

Parliamentary pairing conventions see one side of the House withdraw an MP from a vote when the other side has one of its members away.

The Speaker does not have a vote on individual Bills.

With Labor holding on to a slim 76 to 74 minority government, it hopes to keeps its two-seat buffer by having the Speaker paired.

For more, pick up a copy of today's Canberra Times