PETER Beattie today described The Courier-Mail's headline "Send in the Clown" as a "lot of fun".

"You have got to laugh at yourself, if you don't you are dead,'' Mr Beattie said.

"I have never been sensitive to any form of criticism because politics is a combat sport.

"And if you can't take a bit of criticism and a bit of fun then frankly you should get out of the kitchen."

Mr Beattie also confessed to be a big fan of the song, written by Stephen Sondheim.

"That is one of my favourite songs,'' he said.

"Those who understand the song will think it is wonderful, those who don't like the song will think maybe it is right.''

Earlier, the new candidate for Forde Peter Beattie had a chat with the man he usurped, Des Hardman, and appears to believe there are no hard feelings.

Speaking at an impromptu press conference outside his Beenleigh campaign office, Mr Beattie said he phoned Mr Hardman yesterday.

"I rang him yesterday and talked to him - look he is a really good nice guy and that would have been a difficult decision," Mr Beattie said outside his campaign office.

Whether the good feelings will extend to Mr Hardman joining his campaign team is yet to be decided.

"At some future time that is something I might talk to him about," Mr Beattie said before correcting himself.

"That is something for him to talk about, not me - I have a lot of respect for him and I am not going to be out indicating he will do that, that is his decision, he is a good guy."

Mr Beattie was announced yesterday as the surprise new Federal Labor candidate in the seat of Forde between the Gold Coast and Brisbane, replacing the previously pre-selected candidate Mr Hardman.

Mr Beattie said he had enjoyed his first morning on the campaign trail and again denied he had any thoughts of moving beyond the back bench to the prime ministerial suite.

"I am only thinking about winning this seat," he said.

"This is a tough seat, it is going to be very hard, I am not taking anything for granted."

Mr Beattie appeared upbeat and cheerful with wife Heather by his side.

He said he had enjoyed his first morning on the campaign trail - his first experience on the hustings since 2006.

"I have really enjoyed it," he said.

"It's a beautiful day, I can't think of any weather better than this anywhere in the world.

"Look at this - this is Beenleigh and it's raining in Sydney.

"That says it all."

Earlier The Courier-Mail reported the old Des Hardmen campaign signs were being gathered up for destruction this morning as the new candidate for Forde Peter Beattie conferred with his campaign team in his Beenleigh office.

A woman came by at 11.15am with two of them which were hastily put away from the prying eyes of media camped outside the office plastered with "Rudd 4 QLD" posters.

Mr Beattie joined fellow candidates for a media forum in Beenleigh this morning where he spoke of his early life as one of seven kid from a poor family.

"Education transformed my life," he said.

He hoped to do the same for many others in an electorate which has plenty of battlers looking to improve their lot in life.

"Better school funding for ALL our kids" is the Labor campaign sign standing on the footpath outside the office.

BEENLEIGH BATTLE: Beattie faces off at forum

Earlier, Mr Beattie opposed incumbent member for Forde, the LNP's Bert van Manen, in the main street of Beenleigh during the outside broadcast organised by ABC radio.

``It will be hard, not easy at all ,'' Mr Beattie said. ``I am in the fight of my life. I have to do a lot of hard work. No one should take it for granted. It is in the hands of the people of Forde.''

The ALP's star election recruit was reacting to news of a poll by Reachtel which had him (46 per cent) behind Mr van Manen (54 per cent) on a two-party preferred basis.

This morning the Albert and Logan News also approached 150 people in Beenleigh, asking who they were voting for at the next election.

Forty-two said they would vote for the LNP, 32 for the ALP while 60 were undecided. The remainder would either vote informal or for other parties.

``It shows how difficult it will be. Clearly I am the underdog,'' Mr Beattie said.

Mr van Manen said he was not surprised there was uncertainty in the electorate, saying ``people want to have a look'' before committing on polling day.

Nor was he surprised Mr Beattie had taken the underdog status.

Overnight, The Courier-Mail reported that Kevin Rudd begged his old enemy Peter Beattie to help him prop up Labor's vote in Queensland after he realised his political honeymoon was fading fast.

Despite an initial boost in popularity that helped re-energise Labor, secret polling showed the Ruddmentum was faltering the week before the PM called the election.

In a sign of desperation, Kevin Rudd made a personal phone call to Mr Beattie pleading for his help.

Within days one of Queensland's most popular Premiers became a shock late entrant into the federal political campaign.

READ MORE: Long march of hatred can't be left in the past

Beattie's jibes water off Rudd's back

Beattie: I'd be petty not to stand

Despite repeatedly ruling out another stint in politics, Mr Beattie - known for his clowning around for the cameras - will contest the knife-edge seat of Forde, 40km from his salubrious home in Wilston.

Plans for the desperate revival were hatched a week ago when Labor began polling to assess how Mr Beattie would perform if rookie candidate Des Hardman was sacked.

The polls showed Labor was set to lose Forde with a two party preferred vote of 46 per cent, but could be delivered a 5 point boost with Mr Beattie.

The UMR Research poll found Mr Beattie would lift Labor's primary vote from 41 per cent to 47 per cent, while the Liberal National Party's support would slump from 48 per cent to 44 per cent.

IN PICTURES: Life and times of Peter Beattie

Separate LNP polling also is understood to show the "Rudd bubble'' has peaked, and is now waning across the state, in both city and rural seats.

media_camera Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, candidate for Forde, Peter Beattie and centre is his wife Heather. The three were all smiles yesterday but that hasn't always been the case, with Mr Rudd and Mr Beattie old enemies. Pic: Adam Head

In a sign that Mr Beattie could help reverse the slide in Mr Rudd's appeal across the state, Labor's internal polling showed 53 per cent had a positive impression of the former Premier.

Thirty per cent of voters said they had a negative impression of him.

In a bizarre plea for votes, Mr Beattie's first campaign act was to urge Australians to support Labor to ensure against handing too much power to the Coalition.

"If Tony Abbott wins this election we'll have wall-to-wall LNP from one end of Queensland to the other," he said.

"Everybody knows that if you don't have balance ... You don't have anyone to keep the bastards honest."

Labor hopes to use Mr Beattie to capitalise on a voter backlash against Campbell Newman.

The former Premier has significant baggage from his decade running the state including the Queensland Health payroll scandal and an abandoned plan desalination plant.

But the self-confessed "media tart" also pulled off a miracle landslide election win for Labor in 2001 after a scandal over branch stacking.

Mr Beattie has long been scathing of Mr Rudd, blasting him for having no "political judgment" and putting "personal ambition ahead of the national interest".

In a stunning campaign backflip, Mr Beattie yesterday backed away from his criticism, insisting the PM had shown he had changed by putting aside their differences and urging him to run.

Mr Rudd dismissed Mr Beattie's past attacks on him as "water off a duck's back".

The Opposition seized on the circus.

Tony Abbott mocked Mr Beattie as "another flim-flam man who hit people with record debt and deficit" and who could undermine Mr Rudd's leadership.

Despite his high profile, Mr Beattie insisted yesterday he was willing to serve as a "humble backbencher" and vowed to serve out a full term in parliament if he won the seat but Labor lost the election.

But he will first have to convince voters of the Beenleigh based seat of Forde that he is one of them after being parachuted in.

Mr Beattie said he moved into Cornubia, where his brother has been a long-time resident, and promised he would buy a place in the electorate if he won the seat.

He said he was not taking the seat for granted and would focus his efforts there.

Additional reporting, Steven Scott, Michael Madigan, Andrew Dawson and Madonna King

###