THIS is the story of a political rodent, Labor's political Pied Piper and a leader who stepped in his own rat trap.

Details on how Liberal National Party double-crosser Peter Slipper was groomed by the ALP to take on the role of Speaker in the nation's Parliament can now be revealed.

The spade-work by Labor tactician Anthony Albanese began on the afternoon of May 31 after a heated battle in Question Time.

At the time, Speaker Harry Jenkins lost a vote on the floor to suspend Liberal MP Bob Baldwin from the House of Representatives. Usually, a Speaker would resign under these circumstances, and indeed, Jenkins said, "After Question Time, I will be taking the time to consider my position".

Opposition Leader Tony Abbott jumped to his feet, almost begging Jenkins to stay, knowing that if the MP moved to the backbench, Prime Minister Julia Gillard would benefit from an extra voting number.

But it jolted Albanese - Labor's Leader of the House - into action. Albanese already had a good relationship with Slipper, who was serving as deputy speaker.

So while the Coalition was slamming the PM on her carbon tax and weak leadership, Albanese held a private meeting with Slipper.

He asked if he would be willing to take on the Speaker's role if Jenkins ever pulled the pin. Albanese and Slipper both knew it would lead to the Queensland MP being thrown out of the LNP.

But Slipper was already considered a pariah and was labelled a rat for switching from the Nationals to the Liberal Party earlier in his career. He also knew the LNP would not support his pre-selection at the next election and was ready to dump him for former Howard government minister Mal Brough.

Slipper agreed, and the waiting game began. Over the months, Albanese maintained a good relationship with the ostracised Coalition MP while Slipper's colleagues publicly rebuked him and leaked stories about alleged rorting.

The perfect storm headed the ALP's way early last week. Jenkins had become tired and frustrated.

But he wanted to introduce US President Barack Obama into the House of Representatives in mid-November before making his move.

Jenkins, a social MP who is very close to Ms Gillard, was unable to attend as many functions because of the burdens of minority Government.

So on the morning of Thursday, November 24, he made up his mind to resign. For Jenkins, losing $100,00 from his paypacket was not that much of a concern.

Earlier in the week, the LNP executive in Queensland was getting ready to dump Slipper.

On November 22, Slipper returned phone calls by LNP president Bruce McIver, who was becoming worried about rumours the MP was threatening a curve ball just before the state election.

McIver told Slipper there were three options: do nothing, bring on an early pre-selection or be disciplined. Slipper replied, "That's up to you, Mr President".

That night McIver and his team scheduled to meet about what to do about "Slippery Slipper".

But McIver got an ominous phone call from a non-party member hours later, warning that Slipper was acting strangely and was up to something.

McIver was hoping Slipper would resign, saving the executive from taking action. But the next morning Jenkins threw a bomb.

Before Jenkins told the Parliament of his decision, Slipper was advised at 7.30am of what was planned. Albanese and Slipper had a private conversation.

Slipper reaffirmed his commitment and his own team, that had treated him so shabbily, was none the wiser until hours later.

At 10am, the ALP held a caucus meeting where Albanese revealed he would be supporting Slipper's bid for the job. Albanese had war-gamed any potential problems about the plan and determined it was worth the risk. Caucus agreed.

Now, for the first time, the Gillard Government could suspend standing orders and bring on its legislation. The political manoeuvre cannot be underplayed. Abbott was left blindsided by one of his own, the Government has an extra vote in the house, the power of the Independents has been reduced and the threat of an early election has been lessened.