Probe launched into lost WA Senate ballot papers

The West Australian Senate recount in Perth. Picture: Colin Murty

THE result of Western Australia's Senate race may be decided in court or even by a new election after electoral officials admitted losing nearly 1400 votes.

The Australian Electoral Commission has called in former federal police commissioner Mick Keelty to investigate the loss of 1375 ballot papers missing from the WA Senate recount.

Electoral Commissioner Ed Killesteyn said a “serious administrative issue came to light” during the recount in the six Senate seats.

“Specifically, 1,375 votes, all of which had been verified during the initial WA Senate count, could not be located, rechecked or verified in the recount process.

“On behalf of the AEC I apologise to the electors of Western Australia and to the candidates and parties for this failure of the AEC.”

Mr Killesteyn said Mr Keelty had been appointed to conduct an independent investigation into the matter.

He would establish the facts regarding the missing ballot papers, and identify any procedural failures that may have occurred.

Mr Killesteyn said the AEC would also closely examine the Senate outcome in Western Australia and consider whether any petition to the Court of Disputed Returns was necessary.

AEC spokesman Phil Diak said the Court of Disputed Returns may be asked to finally declare the winners, but added that there was also a provision for a fresh by-election to be held.

“The distribution of preferences and the declaration of the poll will go ahead and it is required to go ahead,” Mr Diak said.

“Then the commission will consider the implications, and whether itself it regards the result as one that may need further consideration.”

The AEC is undertaking the recount following an appeal by Greens senator Scott Ludlham, who lost his seat to the Palmer United Party's Zhenya Wang in the initial count.

The ballot papers had already been classified, with 1255 counted as formal above-the-line ballots and 120 as informal votes.

Mr Diak said there had been an exhaustive, but ultimately unsuccessful, search for the missing ballot papers.

“We've looked methodically through all the premises where those votes were stored and where they were stored,” he told ABC News24.

“We've exhaustively and comprehensively in WA in all the premises tracked where the votes have been, transported and so forth, and it's not until today - with all the last parcels of votes to be recounted opened - that that process of elimination has led us to the conclusion that they have been misplaced.”

Special Minister of State Michael Ronaldson said the news was “disconcerting” and “deeply disappointing”.

“I have personally expressed to the Electoral Commissioner my strong view that this situation is totally unsatisfactory and that I, as the responsible minister, view this matter very dimly,” Senator Ronaldson said.

“Incidents such as this go to the heart of the AEC's reputation. Trust in our democratic institutions is paramount.”

Mr Killesteyn said the recount would be completed soon.

The WA recount was ordered when Senator Ludlam was ruled to have lost his seat after one crucial choke point in the count left him just 14 votes short.

That angered Clive Palmer, who labelled the recount undemocratic and called the AEC incompetent.

Mr Palmer today seized on the latest revelation, accusing the AEC of deliberately rigging the election.

“It's just trying to rig the election, it's trying to stop our party from having the balance of power and the AEC interfering in politics,” he told ABC radio.

Mr Palmer says the original Senate count must stand.

“If the AEC is unable to count all the ballots then the first count must stand,” he said. “That would be the law in the matter.”

And he has called for a judicial inquiry, alleging the AEC may have destroyed the ballots.

Senate Ludlam says the ballot papers must be found before any result can be declared.

“It's inexcusable,” he told ABC radio.

“We think its completely inappropriate for the results of these seats to be declared until those votes have been found otherwise you effectively disenfranchise 1,300 people.”

With AAP