Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott announce they are quitting politics

Updated

Two key independent MPs whose support helped Labor form government in the hung parliament after the 2010 election have announced their resignations from politics.

Member for New England Tony Windsor and the Member for Lyne, Rob Oakeshott, will not contest the next election.

Both seats are likely to be picked up by the Nationals candidate in the September 14 poll.

Flanked by his wife and daughter, a teary Mr Windsor says he has a health issue that is currently being looked at.

"I know there'll be people say that you'll be quitting. The problem is the opinion polls show that I'd probably win," he said.

Key points Tony Windsor says he won't recontest the seat of New England, which he has held for 12 years, at the next election

Mr Windsor said he has a health issue that is currently being investigated

Rob Oakeshott will also not be contesting his seat of Lyne

Both MPs have warned Labor not to expect their support if there is a leadership change

"But I don't really want to be here in three years' time. There's other things that I want to do."

Mr Windsor, 62, has held his NSW-based seat for 12 years and before that held the state seat of Tamworth for 10 years.

He was to have faced up against senior Nationals figure Barnaby Joyce who has resigned his Senate seat to contest New England.

Mr Windsor's resignation will virtually guarantee the Nationals a win.

"This has been an extraordinary parliament, I've really enjoyed it," Mr Windsor said.

The effort for New England will continue. I respect Mr Windsor's decision and wish him and Lynn all best with their family. Barnaby — Barnaby Joyce (@Barnaby_Joyce) June 26, 2013

"I love this work, I love the electorate, I love the people in it.

"But I don't want to love it to death.



"I'm not suggesting that I'm going to suddenly collapse and die, but there are some issues that need addressing, and I'll start addressing them next week."

Mr Oakeshott said the past three years had been the toughest of his life.

"I signed up for the 43rd Parliament, it's run its full term, and I'm just not recontesting for the next time around," he told ABC Radio National's Breakfast program.

"I've been in Federal Parliament five years, 17 years in public life, six elections with a very young family... The time's right for me."

The 43-year-old won Lyne in a by-election following the resignation of former Nationals leader Mark Vaile.

Before then he sat in the NSW Parliament as a Nationals candidate for the seat of Port Macquarie from 1996 to 2002, when he became an independent.

No guarantee of support for new leader

Both independents have warned the Government that their support is not guaranteed should the Labor Party dump Ms Gillard as leader.

Entrenched poor polling and the threat of an historic loss at the election has put Ms Gillard's leadership under sustained pressure in recent days.

Supporters of the man she ousted, Kevin Rudd, have again been pushing for change and claim to have the numbers in Caucus required to return him to the Lodge.

But Mr Windsor says Mr Rudd could not take his vote for granted.

"When the arrangement was made with Julia Gillard (in 2010), it was made with Julia Gillard.

"If Labor can't get their mess together, there may be a scenario where the second placegetter, a bloke called Tony Abbott, would in fact receive my vote.

"The gate is open, but I'd have to say that if it does come down to that that I'd probably be leaning much towards the second placegetter rather than someone that wasn't in the race."

Mr Windsor says he has "absolutely no regrets" in giving his support to Ms Gillard to form government.

"Out of the two contenders she was by far the best," he said. "And I think if everyone puts on their objective jacket, they will say that, she was by far the best."

If Labor can't get their mess together, there may be a scenario where the second placegetter, a bloke called Tony Abbott, would in fact receive my vote. Tony Windsor

Mr Oakeshott said Mr Rudd would have his work cut out earning his support.

"I am not about personalities, I am not about political parties, I'm all about the parliament and policy," Mr Oakeshott said.

"It is about policy on the floor of the parliament. If Kevin Rudd or any other candidate wants to win my support, either now or after some event, put your ideas on the floor of the Parliament.

"I've outlined what I'm looking for... I've worked with the Prime Minister, who is the commissioned Prime Minister, respectfully and honourably on all those issues. If someone else thinks they can do better, put up."

Gillard pays tribute to outgoing MPs

The Prime Minister has praised both men in statements released this morning.

She said Mr Windsor was one of "Australia's great parliamentarians" who had earned the respect and affection of many Australians from all political persuasions in the past three years.

"Millions will be sorry to see him depart the Parliament at the coming election and I will be one of them," she said.

The Prime Minister said Mr Oakeshott was "a man of energy and ideas" with endearing "fundamental optimism".

I've been in federal parliament five years, 17 years in public life, six elections with a very young family... The time's right for me. Rob Oakeshott

"Rob smiles easily and wears his heart on his sleeve and politics could do with more of that, not less," Ms Gillard said.

Legacy of the independents

Mr Oakeshott says he is proud of the progress made in education in his local area and says he is disappointed that more states have not yet signed up to the Gonski plan.

"I think it's been a disgraceful debate that we're even having," he said.

Setting the carbon price was nominated by Mr Windsor as a highlight of his political career. He criticised Opposition Leader Tony Abbott for campaigning against it.

"I think it's just a tragedy that we found that as an issue to create fear out in the community," Mr Windsor said.

"It's an issue that we have to address."

The two independents have worked in partnership on many issues in this Parliament and have spoken very highly of each other today.

At the end of Mr Windsor's highly emotional press conference, the two shook hands and embraced.

Topics: federal-parliament, federal-government, federal-elections, port-macquarie-2444, nsw, australia

First posted