Debate Round 2 breathes life into leaders' dialogue

Updated

After the dull performances of Rudd and Abbott in the first leaders debate, Round 2 was the closest we've seen to a dialogue between the two, writes Melissa Clarke.

The leaders' debate, Round 2. Same protagonists, different setting - and a remarkably different outcome.

The first debate at the National Press Club one week into the campaign was, quite simply, dull. But the change in format breathed life into both leaders. With broader questions, a smaller role for the moderator and no podiums to hold forth from, the leaders engaged directly with each other.

It's the closest we've seen to a dialogue between the two, rather than the usual intersecting monologues.

Kevin Rudd was the first to engage his opponent, in what was clearly a strategic move. The Prime Minister took the first opportunity, during the first audience question of the night, to turn to Tony Abbott, step towards him, waving a hand and demand answers; "What are you going to cut? Which schools? Which services?"

Tony Abbott initially shied from returning Kevin Rudd's direct gaze, looking at the audience as he said, "Can I please ask you to stop telling fibs?"

But before long, both leaders were roaming the floor, alternately addressing the audience in the room, television viewers at home and each other.

Kevin Rudd's plan of attack delivered for him. Under persistent questioning about the funding of the Coalition's paid parental leave scheme, Tony Abbott quipped in frustration, "Jeez, does this guy ever shut up?"

To which Kevin Rudd responded with a classic passive-aggressive retort, "We're having a discussion, MATE."

But Mr Rudd was, tellingly, smiling as he went on to say to the audience, "And that is the standard debating technique when the questions get a bit sharp."

Both leaders looked more animated than in the structured daily campaign events that are manufactured around visits to local businesses or schools. The Prime Minister seemed to suddenly find the Kevin07 campaigner that's been missing for some time. Tony Abbott - with that one notable exception - remained calm, clear and on message.

For both leaders the overwhelming emphasis was on what was wrong with the other.

Both leaders tried to balance positivity and negativity - but both failed. There were attempts on both sides to project positivity, with talk of "building" being the flavour of the night.

Kevin Rudd: "I'm passionate about how we build Australia's future. I'm in the building business."

Tony Abbott: "I want to be Mr Build, Build, Build, so we can have jobs, jobs, jobs."

But for both leaders, the overwhelming emphasis was on what was wrong with the other. The focus of closing statements was on the all-too-familiar arguments over who you can trust and who has a better track record.

On the policy front, the forum yielded little. Neither came with a policy announcement to drop or armed with new figures to burnish. Tony Abbott clarified that the Coalition's proposed levy on big businesses wouldn't cover the cost of the generous paid parental leave scheme, saying, "It'll cover about half the scheme."

He could only give limited details of where the rest would come from, pointing to funding for the Government's existing scheme and ending double-dipping, leaving him exposed to Kevin Rudd's attack on costings.

The questions the audience chose to ask the leaders about were wide-ranging, from industrial relations, foreign workers and the Government's proposed bank levy, to same-sex marriage, environmental protection, public sector job cuts and asylum seekers.

For an audience selected to be evenly balanced, many of the questions went to topics traditionally seen to favour the progressive side of politics. It was Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party that had insisted a "People's Forum" where members of the public ask the questions. If they had believed that would deliver friendlier territory for the Opposition Leader, they miscalculated.

A third and final debate is inevitable, though the Liberal Party and the ALP are yet to agree on when, where and how. But with both Kevin Rudd and Tony Abbott looking energised from Round 2, it won't be long before the terms of Round 3 are agreed upon for a final tête-à-tête.

Melissa Clarke covers federal politics for ABC News 24. View her full profile here.

Topics: federal-elections, government-and-politics, elections, rudd-kevin, abbott-tony

First posted