Prime Minister Kevin Rudd poses with his new ministry after their swearing-in at Government House.

Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's new ministerial line-up has been sworn in at a ceremony at Government House in Canberra.

Mr Rudd said ministers were chosen on merit and he wanted Labor's "best players on the field".

A number of Mr Rudd's supporters have been promoted while some of Julia Gillard's backers have had their portfolios changed.

Victorian-based MP Richard Marles, who has been a strong supporter of Mr Rudd, has earned one of the biggest promotions, joining Cabinet for the first time as Trade Minister.

Other Cabinet newcomers include Jacinta Collins as Minister for Mental Health and Ageing, and Tasmanian MP Julie Collins, who will be the Minister for Housing, Homelessness and the Status of Women.

The two latter appointments, along with Catherine King, who will become the Minister for Regional Australia, give this Cabinet the most women in Australian history.

Key Rudd supporters Joel Fitzgibbon and Kim Carr have returned to the frontbench as Agriculture Minister and Industry and Innovation Minister respectively.

Video Player failed to load. Play Press play then disable your screen reader. Use space bar to pause or play, and up and down arrows to control volume. Use left arrow to rewind and right arrow to fast forward.

Some Gillard supporters remain in Cabinet but will take on different roles: Tony Burke shifts from environment to the challenging area of Immigration, formerly held by Brendan O'Connor, who will now become the Minister for Employment.

Bill Shorten, who was seen as the "turnkey" in the leadership row and switched his vote to Mr Rudd in the final hours, has been moved from Employment and will take on the role of Education Minister while he retains his Workplace Relations portfolio.

"Bill has a strong mind, he also has a strong ability to communicate," said Mr Rudd, who spent the morning in Newcastle overseeing the launch of the national disability insurance scheme.

"I want our best players on the field and Bill fits that category."

Deputy Prime Minister Anthony Albanese will take over the Communications portfolio vacated by Senator Stephen Conroy last week and will now be responsible for the rollout of the National Broadband Network (NBN).

Mr Albanese keeps his Transport and Infrastructure portfolios.

Ed Husic became Australia's first Muslim member of Cabinet when he was sworn in as the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister and for Broadband.

Governor-General Quentin Bryce said it was a "wonderful day for multiculturalism and what it stands for in our country".

Crean to quit politics

Earlier today, Labor stalwart Simon Crean announced he will quit at the federal election, bringing to an end a 23-year career in Federal Parliament.

He is the latest in a string of senior Labor figures who have quit politics in the wake of last week's leadership change. Julia Gillard, Stephen Smith, Craig Emerson, Greg Combet and Peter Garrett are also leaving.

The exodus has paved the way for Mr Rudd to make significant changes to his ministry, promoting his supporters and shifting those that backed Ms Gillard.

"This is a strong team, I am proud to lead this team," Mr Rudd said.

"I am a guy who believes in meritocracy. When you find people of merit, whether they are women or men, they should be promoted.

"None of you could stand here and say that strong, capable, competent women like Julie Collins from Tasmania, like Catherine King from Ballarat, like Jacinta Collins from Melbourne, would not be there on their merits.

"These people are folk that command the respect of not just their parliamentary colleagues but also the sectors of the community which they have been dealing with so far."

I am a guy who believes in meritocracy. When you find people of merit, whether they are women or men, they should be promoted. Prime Minister Kevin Rudd

Opposition Leader Tony Abbott was less than impressed with Mr Rudd's new ministerial team.

"The new ministry is not even the B team, it's the C team," he said.

Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop described the new Labor frontbench as a "ministry of hypocrisy", saying there are already clear divisions.

"There are a number of people who will remain as ministers who have said publicly that they think Kevin Rudd is unfit to be the prime minister," she said.

"So, Kevin Rudd will be surrounded by people like Gary Gray, Tanya Plibersek, Kate Ellis, who think he is incompetent and dysfunctional."

Rudd enjoys bounce in Newspoll

According to the latest Newspoll out today, Mr Rudd has a commanding lead over Tony Abbott as preferred prime minister and Labor's primary vote at a six-month high.

The ALPs' primary vote is up 6 per cent from 29 to 35 per cent after Mr Rudd was returned to power, with the Coalition's primary vote down from 48 to 43 per cent.

The figures suggest Labor would still lose the election if one was held today, but a catastrophic loss would be averted.