Electoral Commission challenges WA Senate result to bring about fresh election

Updated

The Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) has announced it is challenging the West Australian Senate result to try to bring about a fresh election.

The AEC lodged a petition with the Court of Disputed Returns this afternoon, seeking an order that the election of six senators in WA be declared void.

Nearly 1,400 votes went missing during a formal recount following the September 7 poll.

In a statement, the AEC said:

Given the closeness of the margins that favoured the final two declared candidates, the petition is based on the premise that the inability to include 1,370 missing ballot papers in the recount of the WA Senate election means that the election was likely to be affected for the purposes of s 362(3) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918.

The recount gave the final two Senate spots to the Greens' Scott Ludlam and the Australian Sports Party's Wayne Dropulich, with Labor's Louise Pratt and the Palmer United Party's (PUP) Dio Wang missing out.

ABC election analyst Antony Green says the outcome would have come down to a solitary vote.

Green says if the missing votes were to be included in the recount, the PUP and Labor would have won the final two spots.

The other Senate seats were taken by the Liberal Party's David Johnston, Michaelia Cash, Linda Reynolds and Labor's Joe Bullock.

Former federal police commissioner Mick Keelty is conducting an inquiry into the disappearance of the ballots.

Earlier this week, Mr Keelty said the votes disappeared some time between the day after the election and a re-count last month.

When questioned by reporters, he would not rule out the possibility they had been deliberately lost.

"There are a lot of possibilities and I haven't discounted anything, if you get my drift," he said.

"It's important to find out what happened and that we fix those problems."

Topics: federal-elections, federal-parliament, parliament, elections, wa, australia

First posted