2018 South Australian Election Preview Posted | Updated When Mike Rann led the South Australian Labor Party to office in 2002, it completed a historic clean sweep for Labor. For the first time in the party's history, Labor held government in every state and territory, with Kevin Rudd's federal victory in 2007 adding icing to the cake.

Nominations for TAS2018 Election Posted Nomination details released for 2018 Tasmanian Election

2018 South Australian Election - Post-Redistribution Margins Posted | Updated Why the ABC South Australian Election website has different electoral margins to other sites. Topics: elections, sa

Labor's Battle with the Greens in Inner-Melbourne Posted | Updated David Feeney's resignation sets up a battle in Batman between Labor and the Greens

2017 federal redistribution in Queensland - Major Party Submissions Posted | Updated Draft federal electoral boundaries for Queensland will be released on Friday, and several marginal seat holders will be waiting to learn their fate.

New Zealand election guide Posted | Updated With the campaign over, who will be the next prime minister of New Zealand could come down to the quirks of the MMP electoral system. Topics: elections, new-zealand

Barnaby Joyce Joins the Citizenship Imbroglio Analysis Posted Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce’s discovery that he is a New Zealand citizen by descent brings to five the number of cases being referred to the High Court (sitting as the Court of Disputed Returns) for adjudication.

Barnaby Joyce Joins the Citizenship Imbroglio Analysis Posted | Updated Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce’s discovery that he is a New Zealand citizen by descent brings to five the number of cases being referred to the High Court (sitting as the Court of Disputed Returns) for adjudication.

Participation rates at Australia Voluntary Postal Ballot Elections Analysis Posted For almost a century, compulsory voting has been the default position for conducting elections in Australia.

Participation rates at Australian Voluntary Postal Ballot Elections Analysis Posted | Updated For almost a century, compulsory voting has been the default position for conducting elections in Australia.

New Electoral System Adopted for the South Australian Legislative Council Analysis Posted | Updated Last night the South Australian Legislative Council passed legislation that will change the upper house's electoral system, abolishing group ticket voting in line with changes to the Senate and the NSW Legislative Council.

Final Calculations for the Queensland State Redistribution Analysis Posted | Updated I've finally had an opportunity to review all my calculations for the Queensland state redistribution and have published my final estimated margins for all seats.

Cootamundra By-election Analysis Posted | Updated I've just published my guide for the Cootamundra by-election, soon to be announced following the announcement that National MP Katrina Hodgkinson will resign this month.

Will Pauline Hanson’s Sister Replace Senator Malcolm Roberts if he is Disqualified? Analysis Posted | Updated With it looking increasingly likely that One Nation’s Malcolm Roberts could have his qualifications to sit in the Senate referred to the High Court, the question of who would replace him if disqualified has attracted attention.

Section 44(i) Strikes again - Senator Canavan Makes it Three Analysis Posted | Updated The problems of Scott Ludlam, Larissa Waters and now Matt Canavan are over-simplified by saying there is a constitutional ban on dual citizens serving as members of parliament or standing for election.

Dealing with Incorrect House Ballot Paper Issue at Federal Elections Analysis Posted | Updated Last October I wrote a blog post highlighting that around 150,000 electors had been given the wrong House ballot paper at last year’s Federal election. (You can find the post here.)

Disqualified Senators - what happens to their votes and salaries? Analysis Posted Here’s a couple of loose ends on disqualification under Section 44 of the Constitution. What happens to the past votes of disqualified Senators, and what happens to their past salaries and allowances?

Are Pensioners Disqualified from Running for the Australian Parliament Analysis Posted The resignation of Scott Ludlam and Larissa Waters has opened up the pandora’s box of Section 44 of the Constitution.

Are Pensioners Disqualified from Running for the Australian Parliament Analysis Posted | Updated The resignation of Scott Ludlam and Larissa Waters has opened up the pandora’s box of Section 44 of the Constitution.

Disqualified Senators - what happens to their votes and salaries? Analysis Posted | Updated Here’s a couple of loose ends on disqualification under Section 44 of the Constitution. What happens to the past votes of disqualified Senators, and what happens to their past salaries and allowances?