At least 20 people were injured in renewed clashes between police and demonstrators as Hong Kong's pro-democracy protests entered a fourth week on Sunday with another eruption of nocturnal violence.

Police used batons, riot shields and pepper spray to contain demonstrators who packed the streets of Mong Kok, a bustling shopping district to the north of Victoria Harbour, for the second night running on Saturday.

Mong Kok has been the scene of repeated clashes since Friday night when thousands of demonstrators attempted to reoccupy a protest camp that had been cleared by police earlier in the day.

Martin Lee, one of Hong Kong's most prominent democracy activists, told The Telegraph he believed "triad elements" in Mong Kok were trying to stir up violence that would undermine the pro-democracy movement.

"It is obvious that the scuffles were not started by the organisers of the Occupy movement or the students at all. There were some triad elements there and for reasons best known to themselves they wanted to create trouble," Mr Lee claimed.

Twenty-six people were arrested between Friday night and Saturday morning while 15 officers and dozens of protesters were injured. By Sunday morning, a second night of confrontations in the same area had left at least 20 people injured, according to police.

Ten demonstrators were treated for injuries to their legs, arms and heads, including suspected fractures, while a volunteer medic said she had seen four people with serious head wounds, AFP reported.

Li Zhida, a university student, told Ming Pao, a Chinese language newspaper, he was rushed to hospital with blood gushing from his head after a police officer had struck him with a baton.

The clashes came after Occupy Central, one of the main groups behind the protests, warned violence could spiral out of control and urged both police and protesters to "exercise restraint".

Police leads away a man who had fought with people next to a pro-democracy protest barricade in the Mong Kok district PHOTO: ALEX OGLE/AFP/GETTY

CY Leung, Hong Kong's embattled pro-Beijing chief executive, was the only person who stood to benefit from such violence, Mr Lee said..

"This will work, I think, in the interests of the chief-executive who I believe would like to see the situation getting out of hand so that he could then justify his position in getting the police to take more drastic measures.

"The trouble was clearly created by people with a deliberate plan of some kind," added Mr Lee.

The latest outbreak of violence came after government officials and students appeared to move some way towards ending the crisis by agreeing to two hours of televised talks on Tuesday afternoon.

Carrie Lam, Hong Kong's number two official, is expected to lead a five-strong team of negotiators into that meeting with five student representatives.

"I think she is genuine. I think the students are genuine," said Mr Lee. "Of course it is not easy to reach an agreement in such a short time. But at least when both sides have good faith then you can start talking in a meaningful way."

Claudia Mo, a pro-democracy politician, dismissed the talks as a "political performance".

"Nothing is going to come out of it," she said, noting that Hong Kong officials had already ruled out bowing to the protesters' central demand of being allowed to choose the candidates who could be elected as the former colony's future leaders. "There is nothing to talk about really."

John Tsang, Hong Kong's finance secretary, urged the students to back down amid fears that growing violence could derail those talks.

"I was young before and I have taken part in various student movements," he wrote on his blog, according to AFP. "Retreating is not an easy decision. It takes a lot of bravery. I still believe that you can take the courage to make right decisions at this critical moment."

An editorial in the People's Daily, the Communist Party's mouthpiece newspaper, accused the Occupy Central group of masterminding a "conspiracy" to gain independence from China.

Protest leaders have repeatedly framed their campaign as an attempt to improve Hong Kong's political system rather than a frontal challenge to Beijing. They have also rejected their demonstrations being dubbed a "revolution" preferring the term "movement".

Yet Beijing's propaganda chiefs are increasingly spinning the crisis as an existential threat to the Communist Party and China itself.

The People's Daily accused protesters of trying to stage a "colour revolution" last week but warned: "They have picked the wrong place and are doomed to fail."