Fu King-wa, a professor of media studies at Hong Kong University, said the rate of deletions on Sina Weibo, the country’s most popular microblog service, had jumped in recent days, a testament to the flood of protest-related content and the Communist Party’s fears that the demonstrations might prove contagious.

Many analysts said the in-house censors employed by Chinese Internet companies like Sina had become more adept at culling material.

On Tuesday, words such as “Hong Kong,” “barricades” and “Occupy Central,” the putative name for the civil disobedience campaign, were either blocked or yielded few results on weibo. Sina had also neutralized the word “umbrella.”

Not surprisingly, the government’s propaganda apparatus has maintained an iron grip on traditional news outlets, and the majority of Chinese newspapers have ignored the protests.

According to the China Media Project, fewer than two dozen newspapers on Tuesday gave coverage to the events in Hong Kong, with most running an article by the official Xinhua news service that highlighted what it described as the “recklessness” of protesters.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Communist Party officials have vowed in recent years to better “channel public opinion” by getting in front of nettlesome news, but propagandists appeared to have been caught off guard by events, said David Bandurski, a researcher at the University of Hong Kong and the editor of the China Media Project’s website. “They seem to be completely at a loss as how to handle this,” he said.

Sometimes the censors demonstrated an approach that was at once sophisticated and ham-handed. On Tuesday, CNN broadcasts about the protests were blacked out, but returned abruptly during segments that featured pro-Beijing interview subjects.

Most analysts agree that China’s government will most likely succeed in keeping most of its citizens in the dark, and early signs suggest there will be little tolerance for those who defy the censors.

On Tuesday, the police detained Wang Long, an activist in the southern city of Shenzhen, after he forwarded news about the protests on social media, his lawyer said in an online posting. And in Shanghai, Shen Yanqiu, another dissident, was reportedly taken away by police officers after sending photos of her newly shaved pate, according to the rights defense website weiquanwang.net.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In one photo she posted online, Ms. Shen was shown wearing a T-shirt printed with the words, “When the people fear the government, there is tyranny.”