Photo

HONG KONG — A Hong Kong lawmaker from a pro-business party that supports Beijing said Friday that the city’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, should consider resigning. It was the first time that a prominent member of the city’s business elite had openly called for Mr. Leung to step down after almost four weeks of pro-democracy demonstrations.

James Tien, the leader of the conservative Liberal Party, said in an interview with Commercial Radio Hong Kong that under Mr. Leung, the government’s relations with the city’s legislature had deteriorated. Mr. Leung’s leadership has been poor, and he should consider asking the central government in Beijing if he can resign, Mr. Tien said. Mr. Leung took office in 2012 for a five-year term.

Mr. Tien has a reputation for being a rebel among conservatives. In 2003, he withdrew the Liberal Party’s support for a government-backed security bill, leading to its defeat. Opposition lawmakers have been calling for Mr. Leung to step down for weeks, criticizing him for being overly subservient to Beijing, and protesters are demanding fully open elections for chief executive. Mr. Tien could not be reached for comment to elaborate on his position.

Mr. Leung, 60, stepped into even more controversy this week when he said in an interview with Western news media that allowing lower-income people equal representation in elections would lead to a “numbers game” that would skew “politics and policies” toward favoring that group.

Pro-democracy groups that have been staging the protests plan to conduct a referendum on Sunday aimed at gauging support for how the protest movement can best negotiate with the central government in Beijing. The pro-democracy advocates are staging the protests after the national legislature in Beijing, which oversees changes to Hong Kong’s mini-constitution, set rules for the 2017 election for chief executive that critics said excluded candidates not approved by Beijing.

On Friday, one of Mr. Leung’s predecessors as chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa, called on protesters to end their demonstrations, saying that they had already gone on one month and that the movement was spinning out of control, The South China Morning Post reported.