Scholarism group leader says he and two other members will refuse to eat until city’s chief executive restarts dialogue

Hong Kong’s most prominent pro-democracy student leader Joshua Wong announced a hunger strike late on Monday, one night after a failed attempt by protesters to paralyse government buildings led to violent clashes between protesters and police.

Wong, the 18 year-old leader of the student group Scholarism, announced that he and two female group members will refuse to eat until the city’s chief executive Leung Chun-ying restarts dialogues on electoral reform.

Speaking from a podium at Admiralty, the site of the main protest encampment, Wong said that they will be holding the hunger strike on Tim Mei Avenue, which runs by the city’s central government complex. “We are disappointed by the government’s indifference to the Hong Kong public’s demand for universal suffrage, and we are saddened by the overuse of violence by the police,” Scholarism said in a statement on its Facebook page following the announcement.

“In the past 60-odd days, Hong Kong has changed,” it continued. “The values that Hong Kongers hold so dear – equality, freedom and justice – have all been ebbed away and destroyed … we have no other way when facing a broken government but to let go our bodily desires.”

The decision was greeted with mixed feelings: while many cheered at the announcement, others worried that it might end with Joshua Wong taken to hospital, and with the movement as aimless as before.

“We have been on the streets for two months, and now it is getting damp and cold. Still the government is so heartless and refuses to talk to us. Will they care if we starve ourselves?”, asked a masked demonstrator who gave her name as Cherry.

Wong’s announcement came shortly after leaders of the Hong Kong Federation of Students, another student group, apologised for the group’s “miscalculation” on Sunday night, when it urged protesters to “escalate” the movement by surrounding government offices. Police held the protesters back with water cannon, baton charges and volleys of pepper spray, leaving some unconscious and bleeding, others temporarily blind. Altogether, at least 40 people were arrested and 40 were hospitalised. According to a government statement, 11 police officers were also injured.

“The plan was a failure on the whole, given that even if some places were occupied, they were cleared by the police immediately,” group leader Alex Chow said, according to Reuters.

The protesters demand open nominations for the city’s 2017 chief executive elections, while the city’s leaders, under the control of Beijing, have mandated an electoral framework that will effectively bar pro-democracy candidates from running.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Hong Kong authorities warn demonstrators: we will take ‘resolute action’

Leung said on Monday that police would take “resolute action” to disperse the protests, now in their third month. “Some people have mistaken the police’s tolerance for weakness,” he told reporters. “I call for students who are planning to return to the occupation sites tonight not to do so.”

Although student leaders met with government representatives for a two-hour talk in October, the discussion did not produce any meaningful results, and neither side appeared to emerge satisfied. The government’s long refusal to reopen the dialogue – reiterated on Monday afternoon by Leung – has put the demonstrators on the back foot.

Police officers clashed with pro-democracy protesters outside government headquarters on Sunday night. Photograph: Kin Cheung/AP

The main site at Admiralty on Monday night was relatively empty, in part due to persistent rain and a sudden drop in temperature. A few protesters, armed with open umbrellas, were still facing off the police on the steps that lead to the Central Government Offices, where the main scenes of violence took place on Sunday night, but behind them the once-occupied Tamar Park appeared desolate, with brown patches on the green grass where protesters’ tents had been left undisturbed until Sunday night, when they were dragged away by police.