The chairman of the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee has attacked China’s “confrontational” and “frankly ridiculous” decision to block a delegation of British MPs from travelling to Hong Kong, as renewed clashes between police and protesters broke out in the former British colony.

Sir Richard Ottaway, the Conservative MP for Croydon South, had planned to travel to Hong Kong in the third week of December as part of an inquiry into the state of the Sino-British Joint Declaration that paved the way for handover in 1997.

The inquiry, which began in July , has coincided with large-scale pro-democracy protests intended to pressure Beijing into granting citizens of the former colony greater voting rights in future leadership elections.

However, on Friday a senior Chinese diplomat informed Sir Richard that Beijing intended to block his group's visit, the MP claimed.

“If the committee delegation insists on coming to Hong Kong, the Chinese government will have to take some measures not to allow the delegation to enter Hong Kong,” Ni Jian, the deputy Chinese ambassador to London, said, according to the Conservative MP.

Sir Richard said he had asked the diplomat to confirm that he was saying the committee would be refused entry to Hong Kong.

“Surely. 100 per cent, surely. You will not be allowed,” was Mr Ni’s reply, the MP said. “This is our clear decision. The Chinese government asked us to convey it to you.”

Just days earlier Sir Richard said he had received a letter from Chinese authorities informing him that the through visit his group “would be perceived to be siding with the protesters involved in Occupy Central and other illegal activities”.

On Sunday, Sir Richard called for an emergency parliamentary debate into China's move.

“We are a Committee of elected Members of Parliament from a democratic nation who wish to scrutinise British diplomatic work in Hong Kong. The Chinese Government are acting in an overtly confrontational manner in refusing us access to do our job,” he said.

Photo: PA

Speaking to The Telegraph, Sir Richard said Beijing’s decision “rather flags up the direction of travel of the Chinese authorities”.

“To actually say we have no right to review a joint declaration signed by Margaret Thatcher and the president of China is frankly ridiculous,” he said.

He also rejected Beijing’s claim that the committee’s presence in Hong Kong could be read as an act of support for the protests.

“There is absolutely no evidence whatsoever to support that assertion. It is pure speculation. As a committee we don’t support illegal activities.”

The controversy came as thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators flocked back onto the streets of Hong Kong, marching on its government headquarters in a bid to revive their two-month-old protests and force elusive concessions from Beijing. Anticipating possible clashes many brought construction helmets, umbrellas or even shields improvised from pots and pans.

Photo: REUTERS/Tyrone Siu

Running battles between police and protesters broke out as crowds surged towards government offices in Admiralty carrying banners that read: "I want universal suffrage. Topple the administration" and "We need to protect the students".

Police arrested at least five protesters, according to the Hong Kong Federation of Students.

“The protests have been going on for two months without much progress so it is good that we are escalating,” said James Choi, a 26-year-old office worker and demonstrator.

"I'm prepared to get beaten and arrested," said Fox Woo, a 24-year-old dancer, who was also there. "Even if I bleed I will remain on the front line until the very end. We need to surround the government headquarters and force them to respond to our demands for democracy."

The so-called Umbrella Movement protests began in late September in the wake of Beijing’s controversial ruling about the framework for Hong Kong’s 2017 leadership election.

Critics accused the Communist Party of attempting to install “fake democracy” by effectively retaining the right to screen candidates through a heavily pro-Beijing nominating committee. Beijing insists it remains committed to its commitment to bring universal suffrage to the former colony.

In a recent interview, one of Hong Kong’s most influential political figures urged China’s leaders to begin an immediate process of "reconciliation" and "compromise" with protesters or face forever losing the hearts and minds of Hong Kong's youth.

“It is up to the government and to Beijing to think of a way through this current impasse and to bring everybody to the negotiating table,” said Anson Chan, the former head of Hong Kong’s civil service.

However, Beijing has shown no sign of offering such concessions. Xi Jinping, the president, labelled the protests an “illegal movement” earlier this month.

“With its goals appearing ridiculous and public support quickly diminishing, the Occupy Central campaign has failed," the state-run Global Times tabloid argued last week. “Their radical illusion of reshaping Hong Kong is like tilting at windmills. It will never come to pass.”