Joshua Wong is seen outside Hong Kong's government offices on Sept. 29. (Photo: Alex Hofford, epa)

Joshua Wong isn't old enough to vote, but the skinny, bespectacled 17-year-old has become the face of one of the biggest pro-democracy protests Hong Kong has ever seen.

In the past seven days, there have been more than 23,000 mentions of "Joshua Wong" on Twitter, according to social analytics firm Topsy.

Here's what we know about the wunderkind:

He co-founded Scholarism, one of the groups at the center of the protests

At 14, Wong co-founded the student-run pro-democracy movement Scholarism. Scholarism is one of the main campaign groups involved in the Hong Kong protests, along with Occupy Central with Love and Peace and the Federation of Hong Kong Students. At 15, Wong led a successful public fight against Hong Kong leader Leung Chun-ying's plan to introduce "national education," a controversial curriculum of patriotic material that critics said favored China's ruling Communist Party. The South China Morning Post reported that Scholarism's account on Weibo, China's most popular microblogging service, has been frozen. The group's Facebook page has more than 280,000 followers.

Members of Scholarism turn their back to raising flags during a ceremony in Wan Chai pic.twitter.com/fbWZ2Mrski — Chris Lau (@hkchrislau) October 1, 2014

News of his arrest was part of what sparked the protests

Last Friday, Wong spent 40 hours in detention for storming a government complex. News of his arrest spread on social media, effectively helping to kick-start the recent protests on a massive scale.

#Scholarlism head 17-yo Joshua Wong arrested by at least 5 fully armed police. #hkclassboycott (Photo: Mingpao) pic.twitter.com/MBs7tMSopp — 寰雨膠事錄 (@gaus_ee) September 26, 2014

China can't stand him

Wong is a regular target for mainland China's state-run media, and he has drawn heavy criticism from Beijing. In a recent article in the Global Times, a popular tabloid that enjoys strong Party backing, Wong was accused of being supported and funded by U.S. organizations to foment trouble in Hong Kong. On Wednesday, Wong led 30 fellow activists to a government flag-raising ceremony as part of National Day, where they turned their backs and crossed their arms in the air in a show of defiance. They acted "to show our disagreement towards the CCP (Chinese Communist Party), especially for the decision made on political reform in Hong Kong," and to demand Leung's resignation, Wong said.

Young man of the moment, student protest leader Joshua Wong (right) addresses crowds near gov't HQ #occupycentralpic.twitter.com/5s7lmMreR6 — Tom Grundy (@tomgrundy) October 1, 2014

His idol is a Tiananmen Square student leader

Wong's idol is the 1989 Tiananmen Square student leader Wang Dan, Wong told the Financial Times in September. But he would prefer to avoid the bloody denouement of that campaign for Hong Kong. "If the soldiers come, we would all go back home ... we don't want to see blood," he said.

Joshua Wong just finished giving a speech outside chief executive offices urging protesters not to fight with police. pic.twitter.com/eUFDRUr2H3 — Ed Flanagan (@edmundflanagan) October 2, 2014

He isn't working on the clock

Wong said Wednesday that the current scale of the civil disobedience movement is beyond his expectations. He declined to predict its length or likely outcome. "Among all the people in Hong Kong, there is only one person who can decide whether the current movement will last and he is Leung. If Leung can accept our demands ... (the) movement will naturally come to an end," he said. On Thursday, Leung offered to hold talks with pro-democracy protesters, but he refused to resign as they demanded.

17 year-old student protest leader Joshua Wong speaks to fellow students on the street outside the Hong Kong Government Complex on Oct. 1, 2014. (Photo: Getty Images)

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1x47UaO