Benny Tai, an associate professor of law at Hong Kong University who is one of the leaders of the democracy movement, said the police incursions appeared limited.

“It’s likely that the police just want to put forward a gesture that they are taking action,” he said at the main protest camp in Admiralty. “And it’s also adding some pressure on the protesters. But I don’t think they are planning to clear the place at this stage.”

What Prompted the Hong Kong Protests? Hong Kong belongs to China and operates under a policy of “one country, two systems.” Hong Kong, a British colony until 1997, when China resumed sovereignty, is governed by a mini-constitution, the Basic Law.

The city maintains an independent judiciary, and residents enjoy greater civil liberties than residents of mainland China. Hong Kong has a robust tradition of free speech.

Democratic groups say Beijing has chipped away at those freedoms, citing a proposed election law that would limit voting reforms.

China had promised free elections for Hong Kong's chief executive in 2017. But the government rejected a call for open nominations, instead proposing that candidates would continue to be chosen by a committee dominated by Beijing.

The current city leader, Leung Chun-ying, has clashed with the pro-democracy opposition. After the crackdown on protesters, some called for his resignation.

The two largest student groups spearheading the protests appealed to Mr. Xi in an open letter to rescind an Aug. 31 decision by China’s legislature that set limits on the election of Hong Kong’s chief executive. The students say the guidelines would ensure that only pro-Beijing candidates will appear on the ballot; they want nominees to be chosen by voters, much as signature drives in the United States can win candidates a place on a ballot.

In the letter, dated Saturday, the students say that Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, “manipulated” a report to the Chinese legislature on which it based its decision, omitting the viewpoints of hundreds of thousands of democracy advocates, and also say that the report ignored the “Hong Kong people’s genuine wishes.”

In a television interview on Sunday, Mr. Leung rejected their demands, saying the possibility of a reversal of the Chinese legislature’s decision “is almost nil” and criticizing the student movement, calling it “out of control.”

An editorial on Saturday published by the state-run China News Service called the students’ demands “arrogant and ignorant.”

The focus of the students’ ire in the letter was Mr. Leung, not the government in Beijing, which agreed to let Hong Kong operate as a semiautonomous region under an accord that paved the way for an end to British rule over the city in 1997.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The protesters want Mr. Leung to resign, a demand made more biting by a report last week in an Australian paper that said Mr. Leung had failed to disclose $6.4 million in payments from an Australian engineering company disbursed while he was in office. Mr. Leung has said that he did nothing wrong and that he did not need to disclose the payments. In the interview on Sunday, he said he would not resign.

On Sunday night, onlookers gathered in the main protest site by the government headquarters to listen to Joshua Wong, the student leader who has become the face of the protests — and who turned 18 on Monday. Mr. Wong asked the Chinese government to respond to the students’ letter, sent by mail and email.

Photo

“Thirty years ago, Zhao Ziyang responded to the letter from the student union of the University of Hong Kong, saying that democracy for Hong Kong would be a matter of course,” Mr. Wong told the crowd, referring to the former head of the Chinese Communist Party who was toppled during the Tiananmen Square protests by students in Beijing 25 years ago. “Xi Jinping, will you have the same courage to reply to us?”

“Xi Jinping, write back,” protesters chanted.

Hong Kong is in the midst of its biggest political crisis since it was returned to Chinese sovereignty. In addition to the main protest site near the government headquarters in central Hong Kong, protesters continue to hold sections of shopping districts in the Causeway Bay area and in the Mong Kok neighborhood across Victoria Harbor.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The extensive road closings have angered business groups and transportation workers. Pro-government groups — who wear blue ribbons rather than the yellow ribbons worn by democracy advocates — say they will give students and the police until the end of Tuesday to clear the streets in Mong Kok and Causeway Bay, or they will do it themselves, the Beijing-backed newspaper Ta Kung Pao reported on Sunday.

Hong Kong’s chief executive is currently picked by a small group of electors — about 1,200, most of whom support Beijing — from four broad sectors of society, including groups representing bankers, insurance executives, fishermen and teachers.

In 2017, the system was supposed to change to give all of Hong Kong’s eligible voters the right to cast ballots. The protests started after Beijing insisted that the 2017 candidates would require at least 50 percent support from a nominating committee — a version of the current election committee — to be able to appear on the ballot. That would result in a rigged system in which democracy candidates had no chance of appearing on the ballot, protest leaders say.

Yet even under the strict guidelines set by China’s legislature, the National People’s Congress, some observers believe there is room to negotiate and a way to satisfy democracy groups.

Jasper Tsang Yok-sing, the pro-Beijing head of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong, said in an interview published on the Chinese-language website of The New York Times that his side was open to improving the way the nominating committee was structured. Although pro-democracy lawmakers say this would result in only cosmetic changes, Mr. Tsang said he was willing to push further in the future.

“The N.P.C.’s decision is definitely a big step forward, and definitely not a step backward,” Mr. Tsang said, referring to the National People’s Congress. “More importantly, taking this step forward means the door stays open.”