Hong Kong media magnate Jimmy Lai, center, is taken away by police officers at the occupied area outside government headquarters in Hong Kong Thursday, Dec. 11, 2014. Associated Press

The occupation of Hong Kong’s Admiralty district ended Thursday as protesters young and old packed up their tents and sat peacefully as police closed in. Some 200 were arrested, including student leader Alex Chow, Democratic Party founder Martin Lee and pro-democracy media tycoon Jimmy Lai.

The nonviolent denouement is another tribute to the discipline and civility of Hong Kong’s democrats. They are now known world-wide for their pluck and creativity in launching the boldest challenge to Chinese authoritarianism in a quarter century.

The local government and its masters in Beijing have also shown who they are. In the fight against the democracy movement, they have corroded the institutions most fundamental to the territory’s civil society. Their approach has hardened the democratic opposition and demonstrated why Hong Kong’s days of commercial and civic openness will be over without free elections to check government power.

On June 10, China’s central government issued a white paper insisting that “loving the country”—that is, cooperating with the ruling Communist Party—“is the basic political requirement for Hong Kong’s administrators,” from the Chief Executive to bureaucrats and judges. This naked attack on judicial independence drove some 1,800 lawyers to march in the street, while the Hong Kong Bar Association blasted the “erroneous” notion that judges must “sing in unison” with the government.

Media independence has been similarly squeezed. Advertising boycotts, firings and even violence have targeted media outlets and journalists critical of the government. Days after thousands turned out for a “Free Speech, Free Hong Kong” march in February, leading independent journalist Kevin Lau was stabbed in broad daylight by men tied to local mafia, called triads. Reporters Without Borders ranks Hong Kong 61st in its global press freedom index, down from 18th a decade ago.

As public discontent mounted this summer—with some 800,000 Hong Kongers voting in an unofficial pro-democracy referendum and up to 500,000 marching on July 1—the government opted to undermine local law enforcement, too. Agents from the Independent Commission Against Corruption searched the homes of three prominent democrats in August, ostensibly to investigate whether Jimmy Lai, owner of Next Media, had improperly donated to legislator Lee Cheuk-yan. The raid has had no apparent result, except to suggest that Hong Kong’s anticorruption watchdog has itself been corrupted to serve Beijing.

Also ominous is the behavior of police over the past 10 weeks. Officers tear-gassed peaceful demonstrators on Sept. 28 and then began using pepper spray and batons in crowd-control operations that landed scores of protesters in the hospital. Seven officers were caught on tape kicking and beating a protester lying handcuffed on the ground.

Several times in October officers appeared to stand aside as triad gangsters attacked protest sites. Police eventually made arrests but have never explained why they were so slow to respond. Though Beijing and its local allies have long had ties to what they consider “patriotic” triads, allowing peaceful protesters to face assault and intimidation from vigilante gangsters marked a new low.

Two weeks ago, a group of British Parliamentarians were barred from traveling to Hong Kong, with the message delivered not by Hong Kong officials—who are supposed to administer their own visa system—but by China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Beijing no longer even pays lip service to the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and other promises to grant Hong Kong “a high degree of autonomy.”

Pro-Beijing politicians, academics and corporate executives argue that raucous democratic politics is the greatest threat to Hong Kong. In June the local offices of Ernst & Young, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Deloitte and KPMG published joint newspaper ads warning that the Occupy Central movement may cause “multinational companies and investors [to] consider moving their regional headquarters from Hong Kong.” Six months later, it’s clear that the real threat to Hong Kong comes from those who bend to Beijing’s whims.

China and its local proxies are so afraid that Hong Kong could become a model of Chinese self-government that they have mounted a violent march through the institutions that have sustained Hong Kong’s stability and prosperity—independent courts, free press, honest law enforcement and more. The slow strangling of free Hong Kong that many have long feared is now apparent for all the world to see.