One of the main Hong Kong protest movements of 2014, also known popularly as the ‘Umbrella Revolution’, was a series of protests that began in September 2014 and ended in mid-December that same year. The protestors – comprised mainly of students and youths – occupied areas in Central, Admiralty, Causeway Bay and Mong Kok bringing traffic in these places to a standstill [1]. The movement’s sheer size and geographical spread is unprecedented with three ‘occupation zones’ located in the city’s prime administrative hub and two major shopping areas with its epicentre in the government’s headquarters in Admiralty. The catalyst for the street protests was the decision by the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress in mainland China to pre-approve candidates to run for elections in the Hong Kong’s Legislative Council - even if the candidates receives at least 1 % endorsement by the electorate. The authority to pre-screen and select candidates still remains with the 1200 strong, pro-Beijing, nominating committee. The series of protests generated enormous interest inside and outside of Hong Kong and attracted sizeable international media attention [2]. Significantly for this article, this media scrutiny spotlighted China’s handling of the protests, its governance model and censorship rules. China was caught largely unawares by the protest movement – with protestors numbering at an estimated 200,000 at its height [3] – as it reacted defensively to media criticism.

The paper argues that the protests did two things with regards to Beijing’s image construction. First, as a reaction to the highly critical, mostly western, coverage of the protests, ‘defensive soft power’, through the media, was deployed to challenge these negative images. Second, the protests allowed Beijing to reinforce existing Chinese-held national images and also to articulate new images and perceptions of China. Studies on Chinese protest politics has grown in tandem with the explosion of internet, social and mobile technologies in China. Lei, for instance, argued that people in China who relied on the Internet for news are more likely to have differing views from the government.1 Looking at more traditional social protests, Xi Chen’s meticulous and in-depth study of the rise of social protests since the early 1990s showed how the political structure in China (while it underwent reform) opened up spaces for social protests. Chen further observed that ‘routinized contentious’ bargaining eventually strengthens the regime as a mechanism to address grievances head on.

Yet despite this growing body of literature [5] on domestic protests in China,2 the literature on the media coverage of protest incidences remains thin [7]. This is puzzling because ‘media’ and its role in international relations have been highlighted in great detail.3 Steinhart’s research is one of the few attempts at throwing light unto media representations of protests events in China. Drawing on an analysis of news media coverage of major events, he contends that protest incidents in China has not become more frequent but rather, more visible. He argues that the acceleration of information through new technologies have strained the authorities’ push to suppress information, creating openings for political activism to promote protestor sympathising accounts.4

His study however, looks at protest events in mainland China and of media representations for domestic consumption. There are no studies on media representations of China, as outwardly projected, as is the case of the Hong Kong 2014 protests. Furthermore, there are no studies that draw the link between how government responses to protest incidences can be an exercise of ‘defensive soft power’. This research goes further by mapping out the expressions of defensive soft power through the construction of national images. A word about the social movement literature on Hong Kong is in order here since the ‘Umbrella Movement’ is clearly one. The integration of Hong Kong into China and China into the global economy has clear implications for protest spaces and for movements to emerge on both Hong Kong and the mainland.5 Whilst Hong Kong has had a long history of protest movement, the return of Hong Kong saw an increase in movements that had a political element as opposed to purely bread and butter issues [9]. With specific regard to Hong Kong, it has been argued that the twenty-first century saw an increased ‘politicization’ of welfare issues as the general populace became more politically aware. This increased concern and awareness on issues such as the environment, the less privileged and democratic ideals.6 Drawing on an analysis of three major news outlets, this paper establishes that, in reaction to negative press coverage, there is a concerted attempt to present and articulate, through the media, an image of China that its leaders want to reinforce and project. How this image projection is articulated and promoted is important because it adds to the understanding of China’s ‘soft power’ and the extent to which it is willing to wield it and shape perceptions of its rise.

The Umbrella Revolution thus presents itself as a unique case study for three main reasons. First, it is not a ‘purely’ domestic protest as it is a Special Administrative Region (SAR). Furthermore, Hong Kong residents and the Chinese government see each other distinctly albeit under the ‘one country, two systems’ principle. Second, there was a large amount of international media attention on the protests [10] with most major western news outlet such as CNN, The Guardian, Bloomberg and many others featuring the protests heavily. Finally, Hong Kong presents itself as a logical site in understanding China politically; indeed, many scholars have attempted to look at Hong Kong to further understand China. Kuah-Pearce and Guiheux, for instance, studied protest politics in Mainland China and Hong Kong and observed that Hong Kong’s own political activism influenced and affected Mainland China’s own political activism. They further note that “The central government carefully scrutinises Hong Kong and its evolution because what is happening in the territory has an impact across the border. Because of Hong Kong’s special status, the Beijing authorities cannot foresee what could happen one day across the border.”7 This observation is prescient as the Hong Kong protests of 2014 became that ‘something’ that the Central government could not predict.

There is also very clear basis for Beijing to be concerned with the protests. Firstly, as the protests took place in a SAR; the options for managing the demonstrations were limited. Moreover, as opposed to mainland China, where CCP controls the full scope of media programming [11] - the media landscape in Hong Kong is much more liberal and contested. This prevents full control over the media depictions of protests as it has been able to with regards to mainland protests through censorship and mobilization [12]. Its response has thus been to primarily respond and react through the media levers it can control. And it is through these media levers (identified here as popular Chinese online newspapers) that Beijing attempts to influence and direct the depictions of the protests and in forming perceptions of the Chinese national image.