Yuval Shany, a member of the rights panel from Israel, said the nominating committee was “not fully representative of the Hong Kong population.”

Democracy advocates warned Beijing for more than a year that the proposed restrictions would touch off large-scale protests in the heart of the city. After the guidelines were adopted anyway, activists in the city, led by students, staged sit-ins in the main business district and two busy shopping areas, occupying vital avenues and blocking traffic.

Those sites are still occupied, more than three weeks later. Tens of thousands of Hong Kong residents have been drawn to the protests, and there have been frequent clashes with the police and with people opposed to the pro-democracy movement.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The United Nations panel said Hong Kong’s performance in following the panel’s recommendations was “not satisfactory,” and it gave the Hong Kong government two months to reply.

Emily Lau, who heads the Democratic Party in Hong Kong, attended the meeting in Geneva where the panel issued its statement.

“I hope that Beijing will be persuaded to revisit the issue,” she said in a telephone interview. “We always have to live in hope.”

Before they were returned to Chinese sovereignty in the late 1990s, Hong Kong and Macau, a former Portuguese colony, became parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, a United Nations-enforced treaty that commits the signatories to respect civil rights such as freedom of speech, freedom of assembly and the right to free elections.

The Chinese government in Beijing never ratified that treaty, but it agreed that the treaty would continue to apply in Hong Kong and Macau after it resumed control of the territories. The Human Rights Committee’s purpose is to review how states are complying with the treaty.

A new poll released this week by the Chinese University of Hong Kong showed growth in support for the goals of the student-led protests. Among 802 people aged 15 and older surveyed in Hong Kong between Oct. 8 and Oct. 15, 38 percent said they supported the protests, compared with 31 percent in September; 35 percent were opposed in the new poll, compared with 46 percent in September.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the most recent survey, some 48 percent of those polled said Hong Kong’s legislature should reject the election guidelines set by China’s legislature, while 36 percent said the guidelines should be approved. The margin of error for the poll was plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.