Pro-democracy activists fortify barriers with cement after coming under attack from counter-demonstrators – some armed with cutting tools

Pro-democracy demonstrators in central Hong Kong have used cement to reinforce the barricades defending a protest site after being attacked by counter-protesters on Monday afternoon, raising the stakes in a student-led movement which has paralysed huge swaths of the city for the past 16 days.

Hours after police began removing barricades across the city on Monday morning, hundreds of men – some of them wearing surgical masks to hide their faces – stormed various protest sites, assaulting protesters and dragging away remaining barricades themselves. Some were armed with crowbars and cutting tools, according to media reports. “Open the roads,” they chanted. Police at one point formed a human barrier to keep the two sides apart.

A large contingent of local taxi and lorry drivers, angered by the movement’s impact on the city’s transportation network, joined the crowd of counter-demonstrators in Admiralty, a usually-bustling district in downtown Hong Kong and the movement’s de facto core. Some drove up to the barricades and honked their horns to voice their frustration.

Although the clashes eased by mid-afternoon, hundreds of protesters and police remained at the scene. Protesters at Admiralty have replaced some of the barriers and fortified them with cement-filled buckets and elaborate bamboo frames, according to pictures posted online.

Many protesters have expressed suspicions that the attacks were premeditated.

“People from New Territories, blue ribbon [Beijing] supporters, triads and taxi drivers must be coordinated by some sort of people … the work is so well distributed,” a 49-year-old protester surnamed Chan told Reuters. “They went to different places in order to keep protesters busy.”

Police arrested three people during the clashes for assault and possession of weapons.

Early on Monday morning, police “removed some obstacles” at 27 locations throughout the city, reopening seven sections of road, police chief superintendent Hui Chun-tak told reporters. They did not attempt to disperse the protesters.

“We want to point out that reinforcing the existing obstacles or setting up new obstacles to enlarge the occupied area and to block the roads is illegal and extremely irresponsible,” he said. “Police will collect evidence for investigation on any breach of the law.”

The protesters, at times numbering in the tens of thousands, demand that Beijing grant Hong Kong free elections by 2017, and that the city’s pro-Beijing chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, step down.

Beijing rules the city under a “one country, two systems” arrangement, giving it a range of civil liberties unknown on the mainland, such as freedom of assembly and an independent judiciary. While Hong Kong’s mini-constitution promised that the city would achieve universal suffrage by 2017, central authorities decreed in August that candidates must be nominated by a committee stacked with Beijing loyalists, making it virtually impossible for a democrat to run.

On Sunday, Leung said the movement was “out of control,” and that the protesters have “zero chance” of achieving their goals. He added that he would not step down.

Mainland authorities have censored discussions of the movement online and detained dozens of people for openly supporting the protesters. State media has repeatedly called the movement an “illegal assembly” backed by “hostile foreign forces”, particularly the US. On Monday, the official newswire Xinhua said people from “every group in Hong Kong society” had called for the protesters to disperse “as soon as possible”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Pro-democracy protesters crowd in the Admiralty district of Hong Kong. Photograph: Pedro Ugarte/AFP/Getty Images

Facebook Twitter Pinterest An anti-Occupy Central protester stands next to police officers. Photograph: Carlos Barria/Reuters