Hong Kong’s biggest protests under Chinese rule spread across huge swathes of the city on Monday, as 80,000 people calmly demonstrated for greater democracy, singing songs and holding candles into the night.

After the turbulence of the weekend, when police fired 87 salvos of British-made tear gas in an ultimately futile attempt to clear the streets, the authorities changed tack, ordering riot squads to melt away.

The result was the numbers on the street blossomed and the crowds savoured the moment to make their demands.

Throughout the day, a mile-long river of people meandered along the arterial four-lane Connaught Road in the centre of Hong Kong, forcing banks and businesses to close and drawing thousands of secondary school students into what at times felt like a carnival of defiance.

Wearing black T-shirts tagged with yellow ribbons and carrying the brollies to deflect teargas that have provided the name for the “Umbrella Revolution” the students poured into the centre of Hong Kong in unprecedented numbers.

It was an overwhelmingly polite display of civil disobedience. No one sat on the grass of the war memorial. Teams of students handed out bags of water, biscuits, cakes, fruit and face masks to passers-by and thanked them for their support. They even picked up their own rubbish, carrying black bin bags with them.

Businessmen stopped to chat and share bottles of water with the youngsters. No one seemed to begrudge them the huge economic impact of their demonstration. Three British bankers set up a portable barbecue to grill sausages for the protestors.

But behind the jubilation, an undercurrent of dark rumours swirled that hinted at what every protestor secretly understood: Beijing will not back down.

“It is wonderful but we know it will not last,” said one 20-year-old protestor from behind a face mask and a protective plastic hood. “They’ll let us stay for one more day and then the Chinese army will come out of their barracks and clear the streets by force.” Another protestor added, conspiratorially: “I have got a friend at the health authority and he says hospitals are clearing their wards to make way for an influx of gunshot victims.” But, he added: “If the police fire live rounds, it will bring a million people onto the street”.

Protesters carry a defaced cutout of Hong Kong Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying as they protest near the central government offices in Hong Kong (TYRONE SIU/REUTERS)

Students expressed fears that undercover cops had infiltrated the protests and urged each other to remain calm and not to give provocateurs any opportunity to cause disruption.

Michelle Wong, 56, who took a day off work at a telecommunications company to join the students, said: “They are just amazing. They are so calm and mature and responsible. I have come here to support them. I feel as if they are my own children.”

Reflecting on Sunday night’s tear gas attacks on the unarmed protestors by police, she said: “Sunday night was the storm. Today is like the sunshine and the rainbow after the story. There are so many happy, smiling faces.”

Chemring, a British defence company, confirmed that it had supplied tear gas to Hong Kong “for a number of years” under approved export licences, but declined to say if it would change its sales policies in light of the Hong Kong protests.

The Campaign Against the Arms Trade said the UK had granted six licences worth £180,000 in total to sell tear gas to Hong Kong in the past four years, as police stockpiled cannisters.

Misgivings about the way the police tried to deal with the protestors were shared even in some quarters of the force. A senior expatriate officer who has been in Hong Kong for more than 20 years said he had been shaken by Sunday night’s events.

“I woke up this morning feeling that Hong Kong is no longer my home,” he said. “I signed up to serve the people of this city, not to serve as a mercenary for a Communist regime.” George Wong, an 18-year-old student, asked why the British government had not condemned the police actions in Hong Kong. “We feel as if we are all alone,” he said. “We are in Beijing’s grip and China is so powerful we do not believe any government or any other country will do anything to help us.”

The protestors were angrily proud of their identity as Hong Kongers. Delighted cheers broke out as protestors waved a Hong Kong flag from a footbridge - a rare sight in a city that has seen thousands of China flags planted dutifully by officials in every neighbourhood ahead of Chinese National Day on Wednesday.

Many now believe the destiny of this movement will be decided by Wednesday with some suggesting that Beijing will not tolerate protests on the day it marks the anniversary of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party.

But the Hong Kong government has cancelled its National Day fireworks, a possible acknowledgement that the protests could continue for days.

Some 7,000 People’s Liberation Army soldiers are stationed in Hong Kong but stay mostly confined to barracks. Yesterday’s protest route ran along the dark and eerily silent walls of their headquarters in the city.

Despite the massive crowds, the reality is that despite the stunning events of the past three days, the Hong and Beijing governments have still made no concessions and given no ground to the protestors.

Moreover, the student uprising in Hong Kong has uncomfortable parallels with the events of June 4, 1989 when the People’s Liberation Army took to the streets and massacred hundreds, maybe thousands, around Beijing’s Tiananmen Square.

Jenny Li, 22, who studies at Hong Kong’s Chu Hai College of Higher Education, said: “Of course we fear the Chinese army. I am deeply worried that June 4 will happen again, that history will repeat itself. I am very afraid it might happen here.”

For now, however, a sense of dread and excitement permeates the streets of Hong Kong as crowds continue to grow - the spirit of well-humoured defiance summed in up a placard tied to a central divider in Connaught Road, the epicentre of the protests. “A good day to die in Hong Kong,” it reads.