There reaches a point in everyone’s life where they will need to borrow money, whether it be a long term mortgage to buy a house or a quick pay day loan. One problem people run into when trying to borrow money is having a bad credit rating, with money tighter than ever and credit ratings available for everyone to see, it can prove difficult for people who have poor credit history to successfully apply for loans. Luckily there is the guarantor loan, a sure-fire way for people with a bad credit rating to borrow money, trusting they have a suitable guarantor. But what is a guarantor loan, and how does it work? Fortunately we are here to provide the answers.

Who should get a guarantor loan and how do they work?

A guarantor loan is a way for a person with a low or non-existent credit histories to borrow money. Most institutions will shy away from someone with a bad credit rating or even someone who hasn’t borrowed money before because they do not have the security that the money will be returned. The guarantor essentially acts as a safeguard, providing assurance that if the borrower forgoes on payments the guarantor will step in to pick up the slack. A guarantor will generally be someone close to the borrower, say a family member or friend, the only condition is that the guarantor must not be a partner of the borrower and must not be financially linked in any way.

There are generally certain age restrictions on the guarantor, although these will vary from company to company, you will normally have to be between the ages of 18-75 in order to qualify for a guarantor. The process of acquiring a guarantor loan is generally a quick one, they will generally do a means test on the borrower and the guarantor, before checking the credit history of the guarantor, one thing that can slow down the process is if the guarantor owns a property in Scotland or Ireland as this can take additional time to check. Once everything has been approved the money will be paid into the bank account of the guarantor, this is to ensure the guarantor is aware of the situation at hand.

Do I need a good credit score?

The credit history of the borrower is not called into question when applying for a loan, instead the guarantor must have a good credit rating, this way the lender knows if the borrower doesn’t pay the guarantor will be able to pay the rest. The guarantor must also have some form of income, and it can range from full time employment to pension. The amount that someone can borrow through one of these loans ranges on a variety of factors such as the company your borrowing from and the length of time you have to pay the loan back. Generally the amount that someone can borrow will fall between the £1000-£10,000 range. The financial situation of the borrower as well as the guarantor can also affect the amount that one can be loaned. For example the income of the borrower will be taken into account, the amount they earn can directly influence the amount borrowed. The guarantor will also be taken into account, for example if the guarantor is a homeowner then this can also positively influence the amount of money that can be borrowed.

Other things to take note of when looking for a guarantor loan

There are various things one should take into account before taking out a guarantor loan, either as the guarantor or as the borrower himself or herself. Firstly it is important to understand if getting guarantor loan is going to be necessary, the interest is incredibly high and, depending on how much you borrow and the timeframe you have given yourself to pay it back you can sometimes be looking at up 50% interest. It’s important to understand that if the borrower goes into arrears, the guarantor, as per the terms and conditions of contract is legally responsible to cover payments. If the guarantor does not do so then it is highly likely that the lender will take legal action against both parties. As a guarantor it is therefore vital to make sure that the borrower is someone who is going to be able to make his or her payments and not leave you with a large amount of debt. If as a borrower you find that you.

Can Anyone Win This Election?

Who is going to win the UK general election? There are 650 seats in the House of Commons. A party needs to win one more than half to form a majority government. 16 of the 18 governments formed since the Second World War have been majorities.

2010 was one of the rare exceptions. The Conservatives won more votes than Labour did under Tony Blair in 2005, but they are disadvantaged by our voting system. They only won 307 seats – 19 short of a majority.

But who will win this year's election? Every day, our election forecasting-machine is using the latest polls to make a prediction. First, we work out what the national polls imply will happen in every seat, and then we separate any seats Lord Ashcroft has polled. He is polling the election's most marginal – or closely fought – seats. They will decide the election. We plug them into our model, and then adjust them as national polls change.

Scroll down to see our predictions for every seat, or compare May2015 to other forecasts (including the latest election odds) and make your own prediction. (Read on for a full explantion of our model.)