Photo: Getty

When Big Ben chimes 10pm on May 7, polling stations across the UK will close their doors and this five-year election campaign will end. The BBC, ITV and Sky News will release their joint exit poll, and offer the evening’s first prediction. And then what? Just how might the next 24 hours unfold?

By drawing on a mixture of sources, from parliamentary legislation to the royal family’s calendar, we can piece together a picture of what to expect.

On May 8 Britain is set to wake up to a hung parliament. Coalition negotiations are likely to begin in earnest. But Cameron and Miliband won’t have a chance to take in the result. Remarkably, they will both be due at celebrations for the 70th anniversary of VE Day. There will be a ceremony at the Cenotaph in Whitehall on Friday morning, to be attended by the Queen, the royal family and all party leaders.

Cameron and Miliband are both due at celebrations for the 70th anniversary of VE Day on Friday morning.

This will be a fascinating occasion, and not just because of its historical symbolism. Cameron, Miliband and Clegg will have to travel to the ceremony from their respective election headquarters, or even from the counts in their constituencies.

Tired and edgy after weeks of campaigning and the tension of election night itself, they’ll be thrown together once again in an environment that demands they put aside differences and present a united front.

What might they say to each other while waiting for the ceremony to start? What private conversations or negotiations might unfold away from public eyes? Who will be thought to have won the election?

The commemorations are scheduled to continue throughout Friday and across the weekend, including a parade through London and a national service at Westminster Abbey.

All the while that this pageant of national remembrance is taking place, talks about coalitions or minority governments will be under way. Or perhaps they won’t. Perhaps the VE Day anniversary will give reason for all parties to suspend talks until Monday, giving the leaders, Queen and country a cooling off period.

Regardless of the election result, David Cameron will almost certainly fulfil the role of prime minister at the Cenotaph ceremony – even if a clear election winner emerges on Friday morning. It’s reasonable to assume that the rituals of a government handover would wait until later in the day, to avoid overshadowing the solemnity of the morning’s events.

**

All of this will be covered by the broadcasters – on the BBC, Huw Edwards will take over from David Dimbleby early on Friday morning, as will Alastair Stewart from Tom Bradby on ITV (Dimbleby will be back on air on Friday night to present a special edition of Question Time).

Channel 4 will also run a full election programme until 6am on the Friday, fronted by Jeremy Paxman, having only run an “Alternative” show until 1am in 2010. Andrew Neil will replace Paxman in the Robin Day role on the BBC.

Channel 4 will run a full election programme until 6am.

Earlier in the night, ITV could have a scheduling quirk to resolve. The first leg of the Europa League semi-finals takes place on the evening of polling day. If a British team is involved, one of the matches will be shown on ITV. What might happen if 10pm is approaching – the moment when the exit poll is due – and the match is still in progress, perhaps thanks to injury time?

Might Bradby have to cut into the action? Might one of the commentators broadcast details of the exit poll? Could the poll be projected on to a giant screen in the stadium, similar to how the resolution of the Ken-Deirdre-Mike storyline in Coronation Street was reported on the scoreboard at Old Trafford in 1983?

A more obvious, and less exciting, answer is that the match will switch to ITV4. But it could be an entertaining start to a hectic 24 hours.

**

As for the night itself, most results are due to come in throughout the early hours of Friday. But results from key election battlegrounds in the south-west and Scotland could be delayed until Friday.

In 2010 the seat of Devon West & Torridge didn’t come in until 4.15pm on Friday. Constituencies such as these in south-west England aren’t likely to report until Friday, thanks to their size and relative remoteness – and that’s even truer in Scotland.

Results from key election battlegrounds in the south-west and Scotland could be delayed until Friday.

The south-west is the battleground for many Lib Dem-Tory seats, and results in Scotland could decide the election. We could be waiting well past the 18-hour mark to learn exactly who holds the balance of power in parliament, and by how many seats.

Thankfully, very few councils will be counting on Friday morning. In 2010 parliament passed the Constitutional Reform and Governance Act, which mandated that returning officers must hold counts within four hours of polls closing, barring exceptional circumstances. This meant that just 22 councils delayed counting until Friday in 2010. We should expect a similarly small total this time.

There may be delays – local elections are taking place in 279 councils, and local election ballots will need to be verified before general election ballots can be counted.

Six mayoral elections are also taking place (in Bedford, Copeland, Leicester, Mansfield, Middlesbrough and Torbay), and in each case the same rule applies: general election counting can only start once verification of all other ballots is complete.

Part of this process involves verifying a sample of postal votes. This is thanks to another piece of legislation, the 2006 Electoral Administration Act, which demands that at least 20 per cent of postal votes be checked against ID numbers on the electoral roll, and this can only occur once polls have closed.

All of this meant that only 313 declarations had been made by 4am in 2010 – fewer than half the seats in the House of Commons.

**

Some of the night’s earliest results could be in Northern Ireland. The country’s 18 seats were counted overnight for the first time in 2010, and is set to do so again this year. The key seat of Belfast East (a long profile of which will shortly launch on May2015) could be among the night’s first results. In 2010 DUP leader Peter Robinson was sensationally defeated in the seat.

The DUP are desperate to win it back, and every DUP win could count in the Conservative column, should the two parties make some sort of post-election deal. There’s a strong chance we’ll be talking about the state of play in Northern Ireland several hours before that of the rest of the country.

More details about when each constituency is expected to declare will be made available by local authorities nearer polling day, and will be covered here on May2015.

Ian Jones is a contributing editor to May2015.com. He blogs daily at ukgeneralelection.com.