WHEN writing its election manifesto, a sensible political party strikes a compromise between its own grand ideals and the practical realities of voters’ lives. This balancing act demands a self-awareness that British politicians have sometimes lacked. In 1983 the Labour Party offered a vision of red-hot socialism to a public warming to Thatcherism (“the longest suicide note in history”, it came to be called). In 2005 the Conservative Party’s programme was a curmudgeonly grumble about modern Britain under the slogan: “are you thinking what we’re thinking?” No, voters replied. In 2010, as the country struggled out of an economic slump, the Tories under David Cameron presented an “invitation to join the government of Britain”, full of highfalutin talk of empowering citizens. They fell short of the majority most had expected them to win (so have governed in coalition with the centrist Liberal Democrats for the past five years).

Why do parties struggle to align their programmes with political reality? Spending too much time in the Westminster bubble may be part of the problem. If so, the authors of the Labour and Conservative manifestos for this election appear to have escaped it, or at least spoken to people who have done so. The two documents, published on April 13th and 14th, are triumphs of realism: short on lofty ideals and long on realpolitik. As such, they are unusually revealing of how Britain’s two main parties see their predicaments.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.













For example, both parties accept that voters have big doubts about them. At his manifesto launch in Manchester Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, sounded like a fiscally hawkish Conservative. The first page of the document, he stressed, assured voters that no pledge required extra borrowing and that his government would cut the deficit every year. He called his opponents a “party of sums that do not add up and commitments that will not be kept”. This stark focus on probity (rather than things Labour prefers to talk about, like health care) was an admission that voters remain unconvinced about its ability to balance the books.

Campaign in prose

David Cameron, too, committed some political cross-dressing in the hope of winning over voters who think of his party as nasty and not on their side. At his manifesto launch in Swindon the prime minister did his best impression of a keen redistributionist, declaring the Tories to be the “party of working people” and announcing he would double free child care and give social-housing tenants a state subsidy with which to buy their homes (see article).

The events themselves were unflashy. In 2010 the Tories unveiled their manifesto by projecting “Who is the new member of Cameron’s team?” onto Battersea Power Station in London (the clever-clever answer being: “you, the citizen”). Labour issued its manifesto on USB sticks. This time there were no gimmicks, just two rather plain-looking documents. Their contents were cautiously practical. George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, dreams of a less meddlesome and more decentralised state. Mr Miliband and Jon Cruddas, his manifesto co-ordinator, want to forge a less individualistic society. Both manifestos contained hints of these ambitions—Labour’s hailing “the power of people’s relationships to build the capacity for love, care and resilience”—but these were muffled by a blanket of retail politics. For example, the Tories’ state-slimming ambitions were buried under the promise of goodies for every stage in a voter’s life, from child care to the state pension.

Tucked deep between the lines were nods to another political reality. With the main parties still neck-and-neck and another hung parliament thus increasingly likely, the manifestos will probably serve merely as the opening bids in coalition negotiations. Both contained policies that appear designed to be dumped, diluted or traded away during such talks, as the Tories did with a number of their half-baked proposals (like a pricey inheritance-tax cut) in 2010. Do not expect Mr Cameron to repeal the fox-hunting ban, for example, or Mr Miliband to meddle with rail and energy prices as much as he suggests he will. If they are short of a majority, most in both parties would prefer to do a deal with the Liberal Democrats. Their manifesto, published on April 15th, was another triumph of electoral realism. Having seen its support collapse after raising university-tuition fees (it explicitly promised to abolish them in its last manifesto) this time the party has taken pains to highlight its red lines in any coalition talks: more money for the NHS and new environmental protections, among other measures. Commenting on the parties’ hints at their negotiating stances, Gus O’Donnell, the civil servant who brokered the coalition deal in 2010 (and a trustee of The Economist), calls this “quite a lot of public foreplay”.

The sheer plainness of the main parties’ programmes was highlighted by wackier manifesto offerings from the left-wing Greens and right-wing UK Independence Party (UKIP). The Greens excitably promise a “peaceful political revolution” including huge tax rises on the rich and 1m new state-funded jobs. UKIP promises a “low-tax revolution”.

It is these two aspects of British politics—the rise of the smaller parties and the likelihood of coalition rule—that best explain the outbreak of realism among the mainstream parties, especially the Tories and Labour. With the election so unpredictable and their own standing among voters so weak, neither dares go out on a limb. Hence the cross-dressing, the reluctance to over-promise, the readiness for coalition. Britain’s next government will be led by a party, Labour or Tory, that went into the election deeply unsure of itself.