Ed Miliband is plotting to become Prime Minister even if he wins fewer seats than the Conservatives in this week's election .

Senior figures in the party are trying to woo the Liberal Democrats to help "lend legitimacy" to a minority Labour government and reduce the party's reliance on the SNP.

The discussions with the Liberal Demcrats suggest that Labour is already privately acknowledging that it is unlikely to secure enough votes to win the election outright.

It came as Mr Miliband refused to rule out making a push for Downing Street even if his party secured fewer seats than the Tories and did not strike a formal deal with the nationalists.

The Labour leader is facing mounting pressure from within his own party over whether he will have the right to govern if he wins fewer seats than the Tories.

Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, said on Monday that the largest party would "normally" go on to form a government in an intervention that put him at odds with Mr Miliband.

• Vote Ukip where Tories can't win, oldest Conservative think tank says

• Eddie Izzard and Jim Murphy abused by Scottish nationalists at Labour campaign event

• Vote Labour says 'Mr Don't Vote' Russell Brand

The rise of the SNP, which is forecast to win more than 50 MPs, would force Mr Miliband to form a minority government and rely on the support of Nicola Sturgeon's party on a vote-by-vote basis.

During an appearance on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Miliband was asked whether a minority Labour government would be legitimate if his party secures fewer seats than the Tories. Mr Miliband replied: "I'm really not going to start speculating about the election outcome."

He ruled out any form of "agreement" with the SNP.

Told it was a matter of constitutional importance rather than speculation, Mr Miliband said: "If you want to get the constitutionalists on to talk to you about the constitution ... you said it wasn't speculation, it absolutely is speculation."

However Labour’s Henry McLeish, Scotland’s former first minister, said that in the event of a hung parliament after the election Mr Miliband will "obviously" consider speaking to other parties.

Senior figures in the Labour Party believe that a Coalition with Nick Clegg's party could help boost Mr Miliband's chances of getting into power.

They believe it would give a minority government more legitimacy in the eyes of voters and allow the party to "out vote" the Tories without relying on the support of the nationalists.

On Monday David Cameron acknowledged that Mr Clegg could be a potential kingmaker after the election and is "just as likely" he will back Ed Miliband as he is the Tories.

He said: “We’ve got to be really clear with people. If you prefer me as your Prime Minister to Ed Miliband, then you’ve got to vote Conservative.

“If you vote Liberal Democrat, you could end up with Ed Miliband. Nick Clegg has told us this weekend he’s just as likely to support a Labour government, backed by the SNP, as to back the Conservatives.

“If I’m your preferred prime minister don’t vote Liberal Democrat, you could get Ed Miliband. Don’t vote Ukip, you could get Ed Miliband. Don’t vote Labour, you will definitely get Ed Miliband.”