In a moment of TV gold proving that elections aren’t exclusively serious affairs, former Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown was handed a chocolate cake during Question Time after he said he’d eat his hat if exit polls were correct.

When exit polls showed that the Conservatives would storm ahead in the election to secure a majority, Lord Ashdown was so sure they were wrong that he promised to “eat my hat” if they turned out to be correct.

He was even confident enough to specify that he’d prefer a marzipan flavour piece of millinery.

Best General Election 2015 quotes







10 show all Best General Election 2015 quotes

















1/10 1. "Am I tough enough? Hell, yes, I'm tough enough." Ed Miliband bats away suggestions he would be too weak on the international stage. It likely to go down as one of the quotes we remember this election by. Matthew Lewis/Getty Images

2/10 2. "If I'm getting lively about it, it's because I feel bloody lively about it." David Cameron attempts to prove how passionate he is about wanting a second term as Prime Minister after Tory donors criticised his lack of enthusiasm. AFP

3/10 3. "Oh it's crats? I thought it was Liberal Demo-cats" Reality TV star Joey Essex is taught a thing or two during his meeting with Nick Clegg. PA

4/10 4. "Brain fade" Green party leader Natalie Bennett gave what was described as the "worst political leader's interview ever" on LBC Radio as she fails to answer how the Greens would pay for its ambitious housing policies. LBC/YouTube

5/10 5. "We're a shining example of a country where multiple identities work. Where you can be Welsh and Hindu and British, Northern Irish and Jewish and British, where you can wear a kilt and a turban, where you can wear a hijab covered in poppies. Where you can support Man Utd, the Windies and Team GB all at the same time. Of course, I'd rather you supported West Ham" David Cameron experienced his own brain fade when he forgot which football team he supported. Getty Images

6/10 6. “This is a real career-defining … country-defining election that we face in less than a week’s time” The Prime Minister made another gaffe when he made it sound like the election was all about himself. BBC

7/10 7. “Ed Miliband stabbed his own brother in the back to become Labour leader. Now he is willing to stab the United Kingdom in the back to become prime minister.” Defence Secretary Michael Fallon launched a vicious personal attack on Ed Miliband. PA

8/10 8. "Ajockalypse Now." The colourful term used by Boris Johnson to describe a Labour government propped up by the SNP. JUSTIN TALLIS/AFP/Getty Images

9/10 9. “The SNP are openly racist. The anti-English hostility, and the kind of language that is used about and towards English people, is totally extraordinary.” Nigel Farage launches an attack on Nicola Sturgeon and her SNP party. AFP/Getty Images

10/10 10. "Terms are like Shredded Wheat. Two are wonderful, three might be too many." David Cameron rules out a third term as Prime Minister. Getty Images

But when Lord Ashdown was handed a marzipan hat during a later BBC interview, he said he would only eat it if former Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell ate a kilt alongside him.

Mr Campbell had made a similar pledge on election night, and said: “I won't eat my hat, but I will eat my kilt if they (the SNP) get 58 seats”.

And the BBC certainly didn’t forget his suggestion. Lord Ashdown was handed a chocolate cake on BBC One, while Mr Campbell received a kilt.

Alastair Campbell is handed a chocolate kilt on Question Time

It remains unclear whether the hat contained marzipan under the think chocolate icing.