Tories were most successful among voters aged 65 or above and Labour only had a clear lead among those in the 18-34 age bracket, according to Ipsos Mori

The general election result can be summarised in a nutshell: the Conservatives did well with voters that turn out. Labour did well with voters who don’t vote.

More than eight in 10 of those who had supported Cameron’s party five years ago did so again in this election, according to estimates calculated by Ipsos Mori.

But even more crucially to the election’s outcome, the Conservatives were not only best at holding on to their 2010 voters, they were also the most successful party among those groups with high turnout.

With voters aged 65 or above, the highest turnout group (78%), they gained a 5.5 point swing from Labour since 2010. And among ABs – the social class with the highest turnout (75%), defined as “households with higher and intermediate managerial, administrative, professional occupations” – the Conservatives registered a three-point swing from Labour.

Within the 65-and-over age group, the Conservatives won 47% of the vote compared with Labour’s 23%. With ABs the Tories captured 45% of the vote, and Labour 26%. In both cases a far greater margin than the overall election result (38% to 31%).

Meanwhile, Labour were only able to achieve a substantial swing in their favour among young people – registering a 7.5 point swing from the Tories among 18- to 24-year-olds, and a four point swing among 25- to 34-year-olds – and renters.

Labour only had a clear lead over the Conservatives among 18- to 34-year-olds, voters in social class DE (the “semi-skilled and unskilled manual occupations, unemployed and lowest grade occupations”), among private and social renters, and black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) voters.

But among all these groups, turnout was lower than the overall level of voter turnout (66%).

To make matters even worse for Labour, the party’s vote share actually fell among those aged 65 or above. Within this age group, Miliband’s party won 23% of the vote – down eight points on 2010.

Overall, Ed Miliband’s party held on to 72% of those who said they voted Labour in 2010. The party lost votes in relatively equal numbers to the Conservatives (8%), Ukip (6%), the Lib Dems, SNP and the Greens (all 5%).

However, the losses to the SNP are of course somewhat more dramatic due to the fact that the switchers from Labour to the nationalist party are all concentrated in Scotland’s 59 seats, where Miliband’s party lost all but one of its 41 seats. The SNP won 50% of the vote, while Labour’s share dropped 17.7 points to 24.3%.

In Glasgow North East, the swing from Labour was an eye-watering 39.3% – the biggest in the country.

Broadly speaking, support for Labour and the Tories remained quite stable (support for both parties was up one point compared with 2010). Both the swing and relative vote share among men and women was very similar to the overall result. In fact, the differences between Labour and the Tories among male and female voters are more acute when the figures are looked at by age rather than homogeneously within each gender as a whole.

However, the dispersion of Labour’s vote, and the party’s inability once again to attract C1 voters (the Tories enjoy a 12-point lead with what is the country’s largest chunk of the total electorate, remaining fundamentally unchanged since 2010), implies that there isn’t one straightforward answer to what approach Labour should take between now and the next election.

And the matter of “predicting” what might happen over the next five years is even more complicated once you add the other parties to the mix – their voting patterns have completely changed compared with 2010.

Lib Dems don't need a rebrand - they need to reconnect to their existing brand Read more

The Lib Dems held on to barely a third of their 2010 vote, losing to Labour (24% of the 2010 Lib Dem vote went to Miliband’s party), the Conservatives (20%), Greens (11%) and to Ukip (7%).

The vote share for Nick Clegg’s party collapsed across the board, only hitting double figures with ABs and 35-44-year-olds. Unsurprisingly, the biggest drop in support for the party was among voters under 34. Within these age groups, the share of the Lib Dem vote fell by about 25 points.

Meanwhile, Ukip finished in third place among every group, except ABs and BAME voters, with whom they won 8% and 2% of the vote respectively. Nigel Farage’s party did best with older, white, and working-class voters – winning more than 15% of the vote with C2 and DE voters, and those aged 65 or above. Ukip performed marginally better with men (14%) than with women (12%). And 13% of 2010 Conservatives claim to have voted for Ukip this year.

Before the election, many, based on polling, were expecting turnout to substantially increase compared to 2010. In the event, turnout only increased by one point to 66%. It is estimated to have remained low with 18-24-year-olds (43%), almost half the level for those those aged 65 or above (78%).

Methodology: All figures are estimates produced by Ipsos Mori based on interviews with 9,149 GB adults aged 18 and over (of which 6,202 were “absolutely certain to vote” or said they had already voted), carried out 10 April - 6 May 2015. Of the interviews, 3,196 were conducted by telephone, and 5,953 face-to-face. All the figures are weighted to the final actual results and turnout at a regional level. While this means these figures are still estimates, this step should make them a more reliable guide to how different sub-groups voted.

