The lack of black and ethnic minority candidates in the Green party is a problem that needs fixing, Natalie Bennett has admitted.

In an interview with The Independent, the leader of the Greens said the fact that the party has the worst record on diversity among its list of candidates standing at the General Election is “disappointing”.

Only 4 per cent of Green candidates are from minority communities, according to a study by University College London – the lowest proportion of all the other major party, including Ukip. This is embarrassing compared to the 17 per cent of the whole population who identify as BME.

She pointed out the party’s better record on gender balance – four in ten of their candidates are female – and said the party will use the same measures it used to promote gender equality in the party to improve its BME record.

Natalie Bennett is interviewed by The Independent's Matt Dathan

The party’s poor record over selecting candidates comes despite having a raft of policies in its manifesto pledging to introduce ethnic diversity quotas in public sector jobs and participation in sports.

“I would agree that our percentage of BME candidates is disappointing and it’s something we very much want to focus on,” she said.

“I’m proud of the fact that we have 38 per cent female candidates and we’ll be looking to use some of the many same mechanisms we’ve used to promote female candidates to ensure that in future elections we’re promoting BME candidates as well.”

White candidates make up 96 per cent of Green candidates. The proportion of candidates with BME backgrounds for the other parties was 11 per cent for the Conservatives, was 9 per cent for Labour and 10 per cent for the Liberal Democrats.

Even Nigel Farage’s Ukip fares better, with 6 per cent of its candidates coming from a BME background. This is despite Mr Farage’s comments earlier this year calling for the abolition of anti-discrimination laws.

However neither Ukip nor the Greens have selected a BME candidate for a winnable seat.

The lack of BME diversity in the Greens comes despite the party’s manifesto pledges to set targets for participation in sports by ethnic minorities, the introduction of anonymised CVs to ensure BME candidates are not excluded before the interview stage because of their identity and a call for the public sector to do more to employ BME staff.

In pictures: Experts' predictions for the General Election - 19/04/15







10 show all In pictures: Experts' predictions for the General Election - 19/04/15

















1/10 Andrew Hawkins (ComRes) “I am thinking Labour will be the largest party. Cameron is making no headway and refusing the debate was a misjudgement. Even if the Conservatives are the largest party I cannot see how they can win enough seats to form a viable alternative to an Ed-led, three-way arrangement with the Lib Dems and SNP.” Andrew Hawkins

2/10 Joe Twyman (YouGov) “Ed Miliband’s performance at the challengers’ debate could boost his ratings, and may result in a short-term boost for his party’s fortune, but I think it unlikely to change the overall picture longer term.”

3/10 Ben Page (Ipsos MORI) “Labour had the better week, and Ed Miliband is improving his personal ratings from a low base, but neither of the two main parties is getting a majority in these numbers.”

4/10 Rick Nye (Populus) “Still no change.”

5/10 Nick Moon (GfK) “I agree with Rick [Nye, who said “no change” last week]. Most campaigns don’t really see much change.”

6/10 Damian Lyons Lowe (Survation) “On the balance of Thursday’s debate – I’m staying unchanged.”

7/10 Michelle Harrison (TNS) “The Conservatives and Labour have barely moved. The most notable event? The SNP hitting 52 per cent on the latest TNS Scotland poll. A key theme for this election is the impact of ‘edge’ politics on the centre.”

8/10 James Endersby (Opinium Research) “Our poll gives the Tories a four-point lead. It was carried out either side of Thursday’s TV debate so we haven’t seen the expected dent in Tory fortunes yet. The pattern we’ve seen for a while now appears to be unaffected by week-to-week events. If our figures hold fast, the Lib Dems would still be kingmakers as Tories plus DUP wouldn’t equal 326 seats, but neither would SNP plus Labour. Both sides would need the Lib Dems to eke out a majority.”

9/10 Martin Boon (ICM) “We caused something of a kerfuffle this week with a Tory six-pointer. Looking back over the last four campaigns, on each occasion the incumbent government just failed to reach the vote share achieved on our first campaign poll. As I’m reaching for an answer, on that basis alone I’ll go for 36 per cent for the Tories and 34 per cent for Labour.”

10/10 Lord Ashcroft (Lord Ashcroft Polls) He refuses to make predictions. “My polls are snapshots, not predictions.” Rex

The Independent has got together with May2015.com to produce a poll of polls that produces the most up-to-date data in as close to real time as is possible.

Click the buttons below to explore how the main parties' fortunes have changed:

All data, polls and graphics are courtesy of May2015.com. Click through for daily analysis, in-depth features and all the data you need. (All historical data used is provided by UK Polling Report)