Take a seat

Charlotte Rose, Brighton Pavilion

Sex worker Charlotte Rose stood in last year’s Rochester and Strood by-election on a platform of legalising brothels (she came 11th) and says the issue is “important for democracy”.

Get ’em young

Solomon Curtis, Wealden

The youngest candidate to emerge so far is Labour activist Solomon Curtis. Just 18, the young chap has a Tory majority of 17,000 to overturn to become the youngest MP ever.

It’s never too late

Doris Osen, Ilford North

The oldest candidate to declare, Doris Osen, 84, of Epic – Elderly Persons’ Independent Party – spent £1,000 on 30,000 fliers to voters.

In pictures: Top 12 wacky candidates seeking your vote in 2015







12 show all In pictures: Top 12 wacky candidates seeking your vote in 2015





















1/12 Charlotte Rose, Brighton Pavilion Sex worker Charlotte Rose stood in last year’s Rochester and Strood by-election on a platform of legalising brothels (she came 11th) and says the issue is “important for democracy” Image taken from Twitter

2/12 Solomon Curtis, Wealden The youngest candidate to emerge so far is Labour activist Solomon Curtis. Just 18, the young chap has a Tory majority of 17,000 to overturn to become the youngest MP ever

3/12 Doris Osen, Ilford North The oldest candidate to declare, Doris Osen, 84, of Epic – Elderly Persons’ Independent Party – spent £1,000 on 30,000 fliers to voters

4/12 Dave Wasgij, Preston Standing to give “piece a chance”, comedian Dave Wasgij has been captured by the jigsaw lobby and is promising free puzzles for OAPs

5/12 Joe Stead, Calder Valley Protest singer Joe Stead will provide colour at the count. He says war can be prevented through music alone

6/12 Arthur Uther Pendragon, Salisbury He’s stood for Parliament in five elections and believes he’s the reincarnation of the King Arthur. Apparently, the stones say this is finally his year Matt Cardy/Getty Images

7/12 Greg Clough, Islington An Australian married to a Greek, Ukip’s Greg Clough wants to stop immigrants using “our” NHS

8/12 Colin Bex, Eastleigh Colin Bex’s mission is self-government for the ancient lands of Wessex

9/12 Dave Bishop, seat TBC Standing alternately as Elvis Loves Pets, The Church of the Militant Elvis, Lord Biro and the Bus Pass Elvis, Dave Bishop (below) has stood since 1997. Among his policy ideas are “free neutering for cats and Boris Johnson”

10/12 Mark Flanagan, Leeds North West Mark Flanagan is giving voters the option of voting for “none of the above” and thereby rejecting every other candidate

11/12 Al Murray, South Thanet Presumably wants a boost in sales for his next comedy DVD PA

12/12 Robert Boaler, South Thanet Robert Boaler for the Al-Zebabist Nation of Ooog party, wants to build a “great wall of Thanet” to save the town from nearby elite in Broadstairs

The puzzling candidate

Dave Wasgij, Preston

Standing to give “piece a chance”, comedian Dave Wasgij has been captured by the jigsaw lobby and is promising free puzzles for OAPs.

Sing when you’re winning

Joe Steed, Calder Valley

Protest singer Joe Steed will provide colour at the count. He says war can be prevented through music alone.

The druid

Arthur Uther Pendragon, Salisbury

He’s stood for Parliament in five elections and believes he’s the reincarnation of the King Arthur. Apparently, the stones say this is finally his year.

Presumably wants a boost in sales for his next comedy DVD (PA)

The confused one

Greg Clough, Islington

An Australian married to a Greek, Ukip’s Greg Clough wants to stop immigrants using “our” NHS.

Independence for Wessex

Colin Bex, Eastleigh

Colin Bex’s mission is self-government for the ancient lands of Wessex.

The serial offender

Dave Bishop, seat TBC

Standing alternately as Elvis Loves Pets, The Church of the Militant Elvis, Lord Biro and the Bus Pass Elvis, Dave Bishop has stood since 1997. Among his policy ideas are “free neutering for cats and Boris Johnson”.

None of the above

Mark Flanagan, Leeds North West

Mark Flanagan is giving voters the option of voting for “none of the above” and thereby rejecting every other candidate.

The publicity seeker

Al Murray, South Thanet

Presumably wants a boost in sales for his next comedy DVD.

He’s stood for Parliament in five elections and believes he’s the reincarnation of the King Arthur. Apparently, the stones say this is finally his year (Getty)

The isolationist

Robert Boaler, South Thanet

Robert Boaler for the Al-Zebabist Nation of Ooog party, wants to build a “great wall of Thanet” to save the area from the “elite” in Broadstairs.