Labour veteran hasn't held voters' surgery for 14 years: Mother is snubbed 40 times by MP who says 'I haven’t let people down'



Defiant: Middlesbrough MP Sir Stuart Bell with his wife Margaret, who acts as one of his two case workers

A leading Labour MP who has not held a constituency surgery for 14 years last night denied he had let down voters.

Sir Stuart Bell’s policy came to light after a constituent complained that she had made up to 40 requests to meet the MP – but was told there was no need to speak to him.



Sir Stuart, 72, knighted in 2004 for ‘services to Parliament’, stopped holding surgeries in 1997. He said he ‘feared for his safety’ after a constituent had threatened him. But pressed further, he admitted he had never been physically attacked.



In contrast, fellow Labour MP Stephen Timms nearly died after he was stabbed at a surgery in East Ham, East London, last May but resumed his meetings the following month.



Most MPs, including Cabinet grandees, hold weekly or fortnightly surgeries. David Cameron, in line with his predecessors such as Tony Blair and Margaret Thatcher, finds time to conduct surgeries in his seat in Witney, Oxfordshire.



Alison Liddle said she first approached Middlesbrough MP Sir Stuart in September 2008 for help in securing maintenance payments for her son from the Child Support Agency.



She and partner Mark Corfield claim to have tried to arrange a meeting up to 40 times.



‘At first we were told Sir Stuart would write a letter to the CSA and we did not have to speak to him,’ said Mr Corfield.



‘We have been told over and over that there is no need to speak to him.’



Ms Liddle said: ‘It has been excuse after excuse. I am fuming. It’s us who put him there – he needs to be held responsible for the job he is paid to do.’



Barrister Sir Stuart, who was first elected in 1983, said that although he did not have the usual surgeries open to all-comers, he had ‘surgeries by appointment’ where he met voters on an individual basis. ‘I do street surgeries and visit people in their homes,’ he added.

He said he met people ‘every Friday’ at Middlesbrough town hall. But asked the last time he held a meeting there, he replied: ‘Three or four months ago.’



‘There is no rule that says you have to see your MP,’ Sir Stuart added. ‘I have two case workers who deal with 100 cases a week. You can’t see everyone who wants to see you. I have been elected in my seat seven times. My constituents are very happy.’



He stopped holding open surgeries in 1997 because ‘I was attacked twice by this lunatic guy. He came rushing at me with fists flying’.



Asked if the man had punched him, Sir Stuart replied: ‘He didn’t actually hit me because I held him off. He kept coming back and said he wanted to get my son. I had to call the police. He also threatened me on the phone at the last election.



‘I decided it was safer to hold private surgeries where people could come by appointment or I could see them in their homes.’



Elusive: One of Sir Stuart Bell's constituents made 40 requests to meet the MP

He was defended by wife Margaret, one of his case workers, who said it was not necessarily a disadvantage if voters could not meet their MP face to face.



Sir Stuart, a former aide to ex-deputy Labour leader Roy Hattersley, was criticised in

the expenses scandal when he tried to stop MPs’ claims being exposed and said the way information was leaked was ‘disgraceful’. At one point he said MPs could be justified in refusing to pay back money.



He also led an unsuccessful campaign to stop discredited Speaker Michael Martin from being sacked.



Before entering politics he lived in France for 20 years and wrote a pornographic novel called Paris 69.



In the Eighties, Sir Stuart played a key role in exposing the Cleveland child abuse scandal, when up to 100 children were wrongly diagnosed at Middlesbrough hospital as being victims of sex abuse.

