Two things unify pollsters when asked about the next general election. Firstly, guessing which party will have most seats is a fool's game with the polls so tight. And secondly, smaller parties will likely hold the balance of power come May 8.

With polls pointing to another hung parliament and party aides privately predicting weeks of coalition negotiations, the demands of smaller parties could play a huge role in shaping the next government – yet little is known about what they will prioritise.

To find out, The Telegraph talked to leadership sources at five parties – Ukip, the SNP, the Greens, Plaid Cymra and the DUP – to see what they would demand in return for support.

While red lines are still being drawn out and many demands will be seen as pie in the sky to Labour and the Tories, below provides a clear indication of the battles that lie ahead for Ed Miliband and David Cameron if they fall short of an overall majority.

Nigel Dodds MP, DUP leader in Westminster

Predicted seats: 8

All seat predictions taken from The Independent's recent Poll of Pollsters

Preference: Confidence and supply with either the Tories or Labour (though formal coalitions remain a possibility)

What will the party demand?

Protect Nato defence spending obligation

The right-of-centre party has put much emphasis on the protection of defence spending in recent months. Nigel Dodds, the DUP's leader in Westminster, called on David Cameron to maintain Britain's 2 per cent of GDP defence spending commitment – a Nato obligation – at Prime Minister's Questions this month.

Neither the Tories nor Labour have promised to maintain that level of defence spending throughout the next parliament. Doing so would be a key DUP demand.

Strengthen the Union

Unlike the SNP, which has made a merit of its determination to use any Westminster influence to bring tangible benefits for Scotland, the DUP are highlighting the need to strengthen the UK after the next election. "The Union needs to up its game following the Scottish referendum and the growth of nationalism," said one DUP MP.

"It will not just be about more cash for Northern Ireland. There are issues for the wider UK that we will push for," another leadership source said about their negotiations position, adding: "We believe in a strong Britain." This emphasis on ruling in all of Britain's interest could make the DUP a more palatable bedfellow after the election than the SNP.

Re-engage with the peace process

Months of wrangling in Stormont at the end of last year revealed that generation-old tensions at the heart of Northern Irish politics have not yet disappeared, however far the peace process has dropped down the priority list at Westminster.

So-called "legacy issues" including parades and flags remain a point of major contention at Stormont. The Government's involvement in negotiations before Christmas was publicly criticised by some Northern Irish politicians, not least Sinn Féin. The DUP will be looking for assurances over Westminster's involvement in the continuing peace process in any back-room wrangling after the election.

What they're saying on the record

Peter Robinson, Northern Ireland's First Minister and DUP leader: "I hope that both the Labour Party and the Conservative Party have a good election, but not a great election. It allows for greater influence for the smaller parties if there's something to play for after the election."

The Scottish National Party

Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland's First Minister and the SNP leader

Predicted seats: 22

Preference: Confidence and supply with Labour

The SNP have publicly ruled out any deal with the Tories. They would prefer confidence and supply with Labour over a formal coalition amid fears of a backlash from taking up ministerial posts. "Junior parties in a coalition always get decimated – just look at what's happening to the Lib Dems," said one senior SNP source.

What will the party demand?

Immediate review of Trident

Removing Britain's nuclear deterrent from Scottish waters was a central plank of the SNP's recent independence drive. Since losing the referendum last September the party has continued to keep the policy front and centre – it is seen as a calling card to the hard-Left voters who have subsequently joined the SNP in droves – and will be a major demand in post-election negotiations.

While scrapping Trident remains the SNP's long-term goal, there is an acceptance that getting Labour to make such a pledge outright would be tricky. One figure close to the party's election strategy has said they will push for an immediate review on Trident to report back before 2016. It is hoped the move would give Labour the political space to water down its position on Trident.

Devolve control of national insurance

Despite the SNP signing up to the cross-party Smith Commission proposals on further powers, the Nationalists hope to use their new-found Westminster influence after the election to obtain a swathe of extra powers for Holyrood.

With independence off the agenda for now, Home Rule is the party's current aim – the devolution of all powers except foreign policy and defence. However, extra economic powers will be the priority, in particular control over the income tax personal allowance and national insurance contributions.

Protect welfare spending

The SNP used opposition to the Coalition's austerity cuts to great effect in the run-up to the independence vote, painting Labour as complicit by standing side-by-side with the Tories in the pro-UK campaign.

As Nicola Sturgeon moves the SNP left, the party will put protecting Scotland from austerity cuts – in particular on welfare spending and disability benefit – at the centre of its post-election negotiations. Strategists hope the party would be able to hold up tangible wins over Westminster's austerity drive at the 2016 Holyrood elections.

What they're saying on the record

Stewart Hosie MP, SNP deputy leader: "Scotland needs and wants an alternative to austerity cuts, cancellation of the horrendously expensive Trident renewal, the real powers of Home Rule, protection for our oil and gas industry, and safeguarding our place in Europe by ensuring that all four UK nations would have to vote for EU withdrawal before the UK could exit."

UK Independence Party

Nigel Farage, UK Independence Party leader

Predicted seats: 5

Preference: Confidence and supply with the Tories

What will the party demand?

EU referendum in 2015

Holding an In/Out vote on Britain's EU referendum before the end of this year will be the single biggest issue for Ukip if it is invited to the negotiating table. Nigel Farage has not been shy about discussing the demand, floating a July 2015 referendum date at the end of last year and again in recent weeks.

The position contrasts with the Tories, who plan to hold such a vote by the end of 2017 if re-elected. Ukip party insiders say there is no reason why a speedy referendum could not be arranged, pointing to how the Coalition held a referendum on the Alternative Vote within a year of the 2010 election. Ukip also want ministers to be given the freedom to campaign for leaving the EU.

Stronger recall powers

"It would be difficult to have confidence in any government – Labour or Conservative – that was not willing to bring about serious political reform," said Douglas Carswell, the Ukip MP who defected from the Conservatives, over the weekend. "Parliament would have to be made properly accountable, with a proper recall mechanism."

What they're saying on the record

Nigel Farage, Ukip leader: “It is very unlikely to think of Ukip joining a Coalition. I don’t think the lure of a ministerial car is the reason that I got into politics ... We could potentially do a deal with Mr Cameron on this but not unless the timing and the terms of the referendum were right.”

The Green Party

Natalie Bennett, Green Party leader

Predicted seats: 1

Preference: Vote-by-vote agreement with Labour

What will the party demand?

Scrap the nuclear deterrent

The Greens want not just to scrap Trident but ensure there is no nuclear deterrent of any form in its place. "That would be a boost to growing global efforts towards a nuclear weapons ban and be in line with our obligations under the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty to pursue nuclear disarmament," one senior source said.

Reverse the Coalition's benefit cuts

Benefits and public sector pay should be returned to 2010 levels, the party will demand. "We will particularly focus on single parents who've been hugely hit by austerity," says one source. The Greens will also push to stop the planned scrapping of the Independent Living Fund, which supports around 18,000 disabled Britons.

Fund a "revolution" in home energy

The next government must kick-start a nationwide drive to boost the energy efficiency in homes, the Greens will say in any post-election negotiations. Among possible proposals include introducing a carbon emissions tax and giving grants to 2 million low-income households to improve their energy efficiency.

What they're saying on the record

Natalie Bennett, Green Party leader: "We would not prop up a Tory government. If after the election there were a Labour or Labour-led coalition or minority government would look to operate on vote-by-vote level to provide stable government."

Plaid Cymru

Elfyn Llwyd MP, Plaid Cymru's Westminster group leader

Predicted seats: 3

Preference: Confidence and supply with Labour

Plaid have previously done deals with Labour in the 1970s over more powers for Wales and the Tories in the early 1990s over Europe.

What will the party demand?

Scrap the Barnett formula

Wales has been losing out for decades under Barnett, Plaid Cymru believes. The region gets an estimated £400 million a year less than it should compared to payouts to other regions, according the party. Scrapping the outdated formula and replacing it with a new "needs-based" division of Westminster cash will be a central demand if they are to support a Miliband premiership.

Protect police from cuts

"There would have to be a break on austerity," says one source close to the leadership. "We realise that you've got to balance the books but it must go far, far slower and it mustn't always amount to jobs in the public sector going." In particular Plaid will demand the police budget is protected and local councils are given better funding packages.

Ditch Trident

Like the SNP and the Greens, Plaid have a long-standing opposition to Trident. "It is wasteful showboating in our view," says a senior source. "It is completely passé. That was the defence policy of the 1960s when we all thought that Cuba was going to blow up. Today it is nonsense."

Whether Labour will play ball is another question. The same source is holding out hope, however: "It depends how hungry they are for government. If they are hungry they will reconsider."

What they're saying on the record

Elfyn Llwyd MP, Plaid Cymru's Westminster group leader: "We wouldn't work with the Conservatives. But we would be prepared, in the best interests of Wales, to work with the Labour Party or any other parties who might be drawn in."