Student Niamh McCarthy is contesting Liverpool Wavertree, where Labour’s Luciana Berger has a 7,000 majority. She’s one of a number of teenagers standing in May’s general election. Lauren Woods reports

Taking part in endless hustings, contending with the press and spending hours canvassing door to door is not the ideal extra curricular activity for most teenagers. For a few unusual young adults, however, representing their local community at Westminster and becoming elected members of parliament is their biggest dream.

Wavertree in Liverpool has a history of electing teenagers. Back in 2011, 18-year-old Jake Morrison made headlines when he was elected to the council there, becoming the youngest councillor in the country at the time.

As the general election approaches, another bright young thing is aiming to make political waves in Wavertree, this time in the parliamentary constituency.



University student Niamh McCarthy, who turned 18 on 28 August last year, is running as an independent candidate for the safe Labour seat, which was won by Luciana Berger with a 7,167 majority in 2010, when Berger was herself a youthful 28.

Other teenage hopefuls running for office around the country on 7 May include Taylor Muir, 19, the Conservative candidate for Rutherglen and Hamilton West, and Michael Burrows, standing for Ukip in Inverclyde, 18, and Declan Lloyd, who is contesting South East Cornwall for Labour.

Having been involved with local theatre groups for a number of years, McCarthy recently took part in a Young Everyman Playhouse production of Until They Kick Us Out, a politically-charged show about young people and democracy.

During rehearsals, the cast invented The Really Sound Party, a fictional political party which inspired McCarthy to enter politics for real.

“Seeing so many other young people having strong political ideas and opinions but having no voice lead me to me getting involved and running for MP,” said McCarthy.

“I’ve always been politically minded but not politically educated, and so had no idea that I was political at all. I think this is an issue that many people – especially young people – experience.

“Lots of people care about things that fall under the political umbrella but they aren’t educated about what politics actually is.”

The “Baby of the House”, or youngest incumbent MP, is currently Pamela Nash, Labour MP for Airdrie and Shotts, who first took office aged 25.

In the unlikely event McCarthy beats Berger, she will become the youngest MP to ever enter office.

McCarthy, who studies at Edge Hill University, believes there is a disconnect between people and politics: “Politics feels like a dirty word, and something that young working class people could never take part in. This is why we believe that political education is of the utmost importance for all people.”

The “average” MP tends to be, in McCarthy’s words, “white, middle age, middle class, able bodied, cis-gendered, heterosexual, business-orientated, men.”

In order for a more representative democracy, she would like to see more representation of not just young people, but other minority groups.

McCarthy believes that the disconnect between MPs and their constituents, especially young people, comes from Westminster’s inability to relate, leaving young people in particular feeling disenchanted with the political system.

“None of the parties seem to understand what it’s like to be a young person at the moment. All of the main party leaders got free university education, aren’t from working class backgrounds, aren’t even from the north of England, so how could they relate to us?”

Though young, she insists she sees similarities between the issues of older generations and those faced by young people.

“Lots of the problems that teenagers experience are the same as those of an older generation, it’s just that we’re being excluded from the support that they get because of the concept that “young people” are a separate audience from “people”.

When asked why she wants to stand as an MP while still a teenager, McCarthy responds with an emphatic “why not?”.

“We need a voice and I see nothing wrong with mine. I’m standing now because change needs to happen now. Why sit back and do nothing?

“We can’t complain if we don’t actively try to change things. We’re not saying we know all the answers, but anyone who does is lying. Obviously I can’t fix the economy or save the NHS single handedly, but neither can David Cameron so whats the difference between us really?”

Jake Morrison, who will stand down as councillor in May after serving four years in office, agrees that young people should become active in politics, “not just stuffing envelopes but making a real difference.”

“However we have to change the culture of politics,” he said. “I know of many many young Councillors who are stepping down this year.

“Younger people have more to lose from the ruthlessness of politics, hampering job prospects for example.”

The “ruthlessness” of politics may have affected Morrison himself, having quit the Labour Party in 2013 following a row with Liverpool Wavertree MP Luciana Berger.

This incident and an abandoned plan to stand in the general election notwithstanding, Morrison acknowledges the positive aspects of being in political office at a young age.

“Within four years as a councillor I’ve influenced a change in government policy, spoke to thousands of young people in school and made a real connection with my constituents, who trust me as a person who is capable of representing them.”

• This article was amended on 3 April 2015. An earlier version said incorrectly that Charles Kennedy, former leader of the Liberal Democrats, was the youngest person elected to parliamentary office, and said incorrectly in a photo caption that Niamh McCarthy is standing in Liverpool Wavertree for the Really Sound Party.