With St Ives finally declared, that concludes our running election result tracker. Click here for the latest General Election 2015 news as David Cameron begins to form his new Government.

See you in five years. Good bye.

The Cornish constituency of St Ives has finally declared. The seat is typically the last to declare as returning officers are forced to wait for ballot boxes to be brought it in from the Scilly Isles. Unfavourable tide times and poor weather have delayed the result for longer than usual. The seat went from the Liberal Democrats to the Conservatives, meaning that David Cameron's party has won 330 seats.

With the 650 seats of the United Kingdom declared, we can report:

Conservatives: 330 seats

Labour: 232 seats

Ukip: 1 seat

The Liberal Democrats: 8 seats

The SNP: 56 seats

The Green Party: 1 seat

14.00 update

UKIP Deputy Chairman Suzanne Evans said: "I am disappointed and sad that Nigel wasn’t elected as the MP for Thanet South.

"After all his hard work and his success in pushing the party from 3% to near 12% in five years. From 950,000 votes to 3.million votes and to 118 second places across the country.

"And in Douglas Carswell one of the most diligent and inspirational politicians to be elected to the House of Commons in recent years.

Ed Balls — CCHQ Press Office (@CCHQPress) May 8, 2015

"I am of course honoured that Nigel has proposed me as interim leader of the party, whose hard working activists and supporters have propelled us so far.

"However the position is not mine to accept but must go to the National Executive Committee. They will meet in the coming days to decide who the party wants to act in the role of Interim Leader until such time as we organiser a democratic vote of the party to decide an new Leader in due course."

13.30 update

David Cameron pays tribute to Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg's public service record.

Prime Minister David Cameron said he would be a proud to lead a majority Conservative government after his party won the general election.

Mr Cameron said: "I truly believe we are on the brink of something very special in this country."

Mr Cameron said he would implement "as fast as I can" the devolution agreed for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

13.00 update

The markets are having their say on the election outcome.

The Ftse 100 index of leading shares is up 134.9 at 7021.99.

Sterling is up 1.15pc against the dollar at $1.54.

12.25 update

James Kirkup's tries to summarise just what has happened in the past hour or so.

Ed Miliband has gone. The Labour leader resigned over his party’s heavy losses. “I’m so sorry for all those colleagues who lost their seats,” he said, in a dignified speech that also included some jokes about his own image and “the most unlikely cult of the 21st Century, Milifandom”. Early favourites to succeed him include Andy Burnham, Yvette Cooper and Chuka Umunna. Nick Clegg has gone. The Lib Dem leader quit over his party’s near wipeout: they fell from 57 seats to 8. Listing the party’s achievements in office, he said: “I hope our losses can be endured with a little selfless dignity." Early favourites to replace him include Norman Lamb. Nigel Farage has gone. Having failed to win Thanet South, he said he would fulfil his promise to quit as Ukip leader. Resigning lifted a heavy burden from his shoulders, he said, recommending Suzanne Evans as his replacement. Meanwhile, Ukip launched a campaign for electoral reform, having won more than 3 million votes but only one seat in Parliament. David Cameron is going….to see the Queen, to ask permission to form a new government. His Conservatives are on the brink of securing an outright majority. Conservative backbenchers have reminded David Cameron of his promise to hold a referendum on EU membership. John Redwood, a former Cabinet minister, said the vote should come “as soon as possible”. Debates about the timing of that vote will be a feature of politics in the weeks ahead.

Miliband resigns

Ed Miliband, Nick Clegg and Nigel Farage have all resigned in the wake of the Conservatives' crushing election victory.

10.40 update

James Kirkup is back with five things we have learnt in the past hour or so - which is an awful lot:

Nigel Farage is toast. He lost in South Thanet. By his own promise, he should now quit as Ukip leader. But will his party let him, or will the Kippers beg him to stay on? Ed Miliband is toast. He’s currently in Labour preparing to announce his resignation. Nick Clegg is toast. He’s expected to announce his resignation as Lib Dem leader before noon. David Cameron is smiling. The Conservatives are closing in on a Commons majority, something many people -- Tories included -- believed was impossible. With fewer than 15 seats left to declare, the Conservatives are on 321. Some things are more important than politics. Mr Cameron, Mr Miliband and Mr Clegg are all still expected at the Cenotaph to mark VE Day.

Farage out?

Nigel Farage has lost Thanet South - the expectation is that he will now step down as Ukip leader.

Miliband out?

With the Labour party in tatters, Ed Miliband looks likely to step down today. A speech at Labour HQ is imminent. Mary Riddell assess who might replace him, while David Miliband "goes for a long weekend away".

09.00 update

Five things that we have learnt in the past 90 minutes. Asa Bennett writes:

David Cameron has thanked Tory supporters, saying in a speech at CCHQ: "The pundits got it wrong, the pollsters got it wrong, the commentators got it wrong... we are on the brink of something so exciting." Ed Miliband will resign by midday, reports suggest. Ed Balls, the man who 24 hours ago thought he would be Chancellor is out of British politics, has lost his Morley and Outwood seat to the Conservatives. Paddy Ashdown, who said last night he would eat his hat if the exit polls were correct, has been presented with a fedoa by Andrew Neil. Ashdown says he will eat it in public alongside fellow doubter Alastair Campbell eating his kilt. Nigel Farage has strongly hinted that he will resign if he loses in South Thanet, hours before the result. Asked by The Telegraph if he would resign, he replied: “Are you calling me a liar?”

Ed Balls

The Shadow Chancellor has become the biggest casualty of the night, losing his seat in Leeds to the Conservatives.

Ed Balls — CCHQ Press Office (@CCHQPress) May 8, 2015

Cameron back at No 10

The Prime Minister has arrived back at Downing Street and is now facing the prospect of having won an outright Conservative majority - something very few commentators predicted and very few supporters dared to hope for.

David Cameron arrives back at No 10 with his wife Samantha #GE2015 https://t.co/CCtZIGLORG — Neil Lancefield (@NeilLancefield) May 8, 2015

07.30 update

The latest summary from Asa Bennett:

Ed Balls' political future hangs in the balance, with a recount underway in his Morley and Outwood seat. Ed Miliband is under mounting pressure as Labour leader. "He's gone. He's got to go," one well placed source who has been loyal to Miliband throughout the campaign told the Telegraph. "There will be people that take him out unless he goes. This is our party now." The SNP has triumphed, winning 56 of the 59 seats in Scotland, with 1 each remaining for Labour, the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats. There are now just as many Conservative and Labour MPs in Scotland as pandas. The pound has soared by the most since the before the last general election as investors cheered early indicators that the Conservatives are on course to be the largest party in Britain. The Tories predicted to win 329 seats and majority government, and David Cameron is expected to see the Queen at 11am and then make a public statement, likely declaring victory.

David Cameron tweeted this photograph, with the caption 'Here's to a brighter future for everyone'

General Election 2015: key moments of election night 10pm Exit poll puts the Conservatives ahead on 316 seats, with Labour on 239 seats, the Liberal Democrats on 10, the SNP on 58 and Ukip on two. 23.16pm Labour win the first seat to declare in the 2015 General Election with an increased majority for Bridget Phillipson in Houghton and Sunderland South. 1.52am Conservatives comfortably hold Nuneaton - one of Labour’s key target seats - with 20,827 votes to Labour’s 15,945. 2.22am Labour shadow foreign secretary Douglas Alexander loses his Paisley and Renfrewshire South seat in the House of Commons to 20-year-old SNP candidate Mhairi Black 2.55am Labour loses Gordon Brown’s former seat in Scotland, the Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath constituency, to the SNP. 3.10am Scottish Labour leader Jim Murphy loses his East Renfrewshire seat to the SNP’s Kirsten Oswald. 4.11am Simon Hughes, a senior Liberal Democrat and MP of 32 years’ standing, loses in Bermondsey and Old Southwark to Labour by around 5,000 votes. 4.18am Ukip wins its first seat in a General Election, with former Conservative MP Douglas Carswell seeing a much reduced majority compared to last year’s by-election. 4.37am Liberal Democrat Business Secretary Vince Cable loses his Twickenham seat to the Conservatives. 4.51am Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg holds onto his Sheffield Hallam seat. He said he would be discussing his leadership with colleagues after a "cruel and punishing night for his party". 5.25am Labour leader Ed Miliband, who retains his Doncaster North seat, says: "This has clearly been a very difficult and disappointing night for the Labour Party." 5.46am Accepting victory in his Witney constituency, David Cameron says: "This is clearly a very strong night for the Conservative Party. We've had a positive response to a positive campaign." 5.55am Former Liberal Democrat Chief Secretary to the Treasury Danny Alexander loses the Inverness, Nairn, Badenoch and Strathspey seat to the SNP's Drew Hendry. 6:07am George Galloway, of the Respect Party, loses the Bradford West seat to Labour's Naseem Shah, who won with nearly 20,000 votes.

06.30 update

Five things we know, from Asa Bennett:

The Liberal Democrats' woes continue, with Danny Alexander and David Laws losing their seats. John Hemming, who also lost his seat, said Nick Clegg can't carry on as party leader, and claimed he has already resigned. Ed Miliband has admitted his party underperformed, saying that tonight has "clearly been a disappointing and difficult night" for the party. Conservative Education Secretary Nicky Morgan has retained her seat of Loughborough, a seat which usually indicates which party will win the general election at large. Ukip is struggling to make its breakthrough, with the Tories taking Rochester & Strood back from Mark Reckless. If Nigel Farage fails to make it in South Thanet, the party could be left with just one MP - Douglas Carswell - in the Commons. George Galloway is out in Bradford West. The Respect MP was thrashed, losing to Labour's Naz Shah by 8,557 votes to 19,977.

David Cameron speaks after winning his seat, at the Windrush Leisure Centre, Witney, Oxfordshire (Geoff Pugh/The Telegraph)

David Cameron hails victory

The Prime Minister, having comfortably won Witney, says his his aim is to "govern on the basis of governing for everyone" in Britain and to "bring our United Kingdom together" by implementing devolution reforms in Scotland and Wales.

• Election results 2015: mapped

5.25am update

Five things we know, from James Kirkup:

Nick Clegg kept his Sheffield Hallam seat, but looks certain to quit as Lib Dem leader after "punishing" results. His party lost many senior figures, including Vince Cable and Ed Davey, former Cabinet ministers, and Simon Hughes in Southwark and Bermondsey. David Laws also lost Yeovil. Labour's woes have continued as the party missed out on many of the Tory marginals it had targetted, seats like Broxstowe in Nottinghamshire. Stilll, Labour did take some seats from the Tories, such as Wirral West, unseating Esther McVey, a Tory minister, and Enfield North. And there are growing signs that Ed Balls has lost his seat of Morley and Outwood. Scotland continues to amaze: latest famous casualties of the SNP surge include Charles Kennedy, the former Lib Dem leader. But there is still a Tory in Scotland: David Mundell kept Dumfries, Clydesdale and Tweedale, Boris Johnson is back in Parliament, having won the safe Tory seat of Uxbridge and South Ruislip. He looks certain for a Cabinet post in David Cameron's new government. Ukip's hopes of a parliamentary breakthrough faded. Douglas Carswell won Clacton, but the party failed to gain Thurrock. That leaves party hopes resting on Nigel Farage in Thanet South, where victory looks far from certain.

4.55am Nick Clegg becomes only the 6th Lib Dem to be elected

A reduced majority (from around 12,000 to around 2,000) but Nick Clegg is an MP again. His "victory" speech had a big hint that he was considering resigning. Who is left to succeed him though?

4.35 Vince Cable's Twickenham

The wipeout of the Lib Dems continues. Vince Cable's 12,140 majority has vanished and the Conservatives have taken the seat from the former Business Secretary.

4.10am What we know early in the morning

James Kirkup's summary:

Scotland is still the most staggering part of a jaw-dropping election. The SNP is winning seats with swings of almost 40 percent. The nationalists took Glasgow North East, Labour's safest seat in Scotland on a 39 per cent swing. So far, the only Scottish seat not to go SNP is Orkney and Shetland, which stays Lib Dem. Ed Miliband is facing questions about his resignation after Labour lost Scotland and failed to take many of its English target seats. There are few bright spots for Labour, though the party did gain Ilford South from the Tories and Hornsey & Wood Green from the Lib Dems. . We've seen the first Cabinet minister of the night ousted. Ed Davey's defeat in Kingston was part of a dreadful Lib Dem night, which also saw Simon Hughes lose in Southwark and Bermondsey, a seat he has held for more than 30 years. George Galloway is no longer an MP. He lost Bradford West. We salute his indefatigability. David Cameron is sitting very pretty indeed. The only question he now faces is whether he gets a full majority. Oh, and how to keep Britain together, of course.

4.00am - These are the important constituencies we expected to know about by now - and what we know ...

The ones we know:

Carlisle – The Conservatives have thrown resources into defending one of their rare northern seats from Labour. They increased their majority from from 853 to 2,026.

– The Conservatives have thrown resources into defending one of their rare northern seats from Labour. They increased their majority from from 853 to 2,026. Kingston & Surbiton – can Ed Davey, a Lib Dem Cabinet minister keep his seat? No - it's a Conservative gain.

Still waiting:

Bedford : Tory-held in 2010, this was meant to be a key battle between Conservative and Labour. Result not expected until 6.30am now.

: Tory-held in 2010, this was meant to be a key battle between Conservative and Labour. Result not expected until 6.30am now. Bolton West – this was a top Tory target in 2010, but Labour held on. A Conservative gain here would suggest the party is on course for a great night. We're still waiting.

– this was a top Tory target in 2010, but Labour held on. A Conservative gain here would suggest the party is on course for a great night. We're still waiting. Croydon Central: Big, big test of Tory resilience in London. Can the Conservatives hold here in face of strong challenge from Labour and loss of votes to Ukip? Count nearly over.

Big, big test of Tory resilience in London. Can the Conservatives hold here in face of strong challenge from Labour and loss of votes to Ukip? Count nearly over. Hampstead and Kilburn – Tories came within an inch of a surprise win here in 2010. A win here this time would be an even bigger surprise. The count is ongoing.

– Tories came within an inch of a surprise win here in 2010. A win here this time would be an even bigger surprise. The count is ongoing. Thurrock – Ukip’s best hope? Tim Aker hopes to be the party’s first MP elected at a general election. Rumours of a recount.

– Ukip’s best hope? Tim Aker hopes to be the party’s first MP elected at a general election. Rumours of a recount. Gedling – another Tory target in 2010, but probably safe Labour this time. But a Tory win here would terrify Labour. Big turnout but no result yet.

– another Tory target in 2010, but probably safe Labour this time. But a Tory win here would terrify Labour. Big turnout but no result yet. Enfield North - Conservative-held marginal: a Labour gain would hurt David Cameron badly. No result yet.

- Conservative-held marginal: a Labour gain would hurt David Cameron badly. No result yet. Blackpool North and Cleveleys - Conservative-held marginal: a Labour gain would hurt David Cameron badly. No news.

- Conservative-held marginal: a Labour gain would hurt David Cameron badly. No news. Loughborough – Nicky Morgan, Tory education secretary, is defending a marginal seat here. Expected about 4.30.

– Nicky Morgan, Tory education secretary, is defending a marginal seat here. Expected about 4.30. Weaver Vale – Tory-held marginal in the north-west; key test of Tory fortunes in the region with the most marginal seats. Still counting.

– Tory-held marginal in the north-west; key test of Tory fortunes in the region with the most marginal seats. Still counting. Broxtowe - Conservative-held marginal: a Labour gain would hurt David Cameron badly. Result an hour away.

- Conservative-held marginal: a Labour gain would hurt David Cameron badly. Result an hour away. Doncaster North – Ed Miliband’s victory speech will give clues about Labour morale and strategy. Think we can predict that now ...

3.22 am: 5 things we now know

James Kirkup's summary just after three in the morning:

Scotland. Scotland. Scotland. The SNP is taking Labour seats with swings that are almost literally off the charts: even Kirkcaldy, Gordon Brown's old seat has gone to the Nats. Douglas Alexander, Labour's campaign chief lost Renfrewshire and Paisley South. Jim Murphy, Labour's Scottish leader lost East Renfrewshire. The word historic is over-used, but surely appropriate for the nationalist gains north of the Border. Labour isn't dead yet. Labour has gained a seat in London from the Tories, Ealing Central and Acton. It's also gained Burnley. Good news for Labour, but not good enough. Conservatives are doing well in Wales. They took Brecon and Radnorshire from the Lib Dems, and Vale of Clywd from Labour. The Tories are obliterating the Lib Dems. They've taken Colchester from Bob Russell and there is talk of gaining seats like Eastleigh and even Yeovil, the seat of David Laws. Ukip is piling up votes, but not looking like gaining many seats. Ukippers are not confident of Nigel Farage winning in Thanet South.

2.55am

It's not looking good for Ukip in terms of actual seats - a string of second places, likely votes in the millions but still only 2 seats predicted. They have failed to take Castle Point from the Tories.

2.30am Tory and SNP gains

Battersea, currently held by the Tories, was a top Labour target in London. But the Conservative majority increased from 5,977 to 7,938

SNP are gaining a string of seats on huge swings. East Kilbride, Strathaven & Lesmahagow, Glenrothes, etc. A sea-change is underway in Scotland - on an increased turnout from 2010.

2.23am Huge blow to Labour in Scotland

Douglas Alexander, Labour campaign chief, has been beaten by a 20 year old SNP student. She's attacked Trident in the first couple of minutes of her acceptance speech.

The swing is 34% from Labour to SNP (when Portillo lost his seat, the swing was only 17%). This is a crushing defeat.

James Kirkup adds: "The SNP gain here represents so many things. It's not just the fact that Douglas Alexander, Labour's general election co-ordinator lost his seat to a 20-year-old student. It's the fact that another rock-solid Labour seat in the west of Scotland has fallen to the SNP. A seismic change is underway in Scottish politics, one that could well spell the end of the United Kingdom as we know it. "

Still to come later tonight

4.30am

Sheffield Hallam: Will Nick Clegg survive? Nick Clegg is defending his Sheffield Hallam seat from Labour

Clacton – Douglas Carswell is seeking to keep this seat for Ukip, and most Tories expect him to win. A Conservative gain here would delight and surprise Tories.

Witney - David Cameron's victory speech here will show us how the Conservatives will approach the overall results: will he claim victory even if he doesn't have a majority, or hint at another deal with the Lib Dems?

5am

Inverness – Danny Alexander, another senior Lib Dem, is fighting for his life against the SNP.

Brentford & Isleworth – another key Tory marginal in London.

Hove, Brighton & Kempton, Wirral West and Warrington South – all marginals held by the Tories in 2010: losses to Labour here will be major setbacks to the Conservatives.

Finchley and Golders Green – a Labour gain from the Conservatives in Margaret Thatcher’s old seat would be unlikely but dramatic.

Rochester and Strood – Mark Reckless is defending this seat for Ukip, a key test of the Tories’ ability to win back Ukippers.

6am

Thanet South – Nigel Farage either becomes an MP or has to resign as Ukip leader.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage has said he will step down if he does not win in Thanet

Uxbridge and Ruislip South – Boris Johnson will win, but will he be celebrating a Tory return to government?

Noon on Friday

Warwick & Leamington – another crucial Conservative vs Labour marginal. If the overall numbers are very close, we could be waiting for the result here to tell us who can govern.

1pm

St Ives - due to be the last constituency to declare. Will the general election hang on the result here, where the Lib Dems are trying to hang on to a seat they've held since 1997.

From earlier tonight

2.10am: 5 things we know

James Kirkup says this is what we know:

The Tories are heading for a serious -- and surprising -- victory, and maybe even a majority. Labour is in deep trouble - they didn't take Nuneaton, one of their targets. Instead, the Tories increased their majority. Ed Miliband may not survive this. The Lib Dems are having an even worse night. On the current showing, Nick Clegg definitely won't survive. Scotland is lost to the SNP. Seats that Labour used to hold with huge majorities are swinging to the nationalists. Ukip is going to win lots of votes but not many seats. Expect the party to come out strongly for electoral reform soon.

1.50am - the first big result

BREAKING: The Conservatives have held Nuneaton.

This was on the Labour target list, around 34th. To really hurt the Tories, Labour needed to gain it. Instead Marcus Jones of the Tories is UP 4%, and Labour DOWN 2%.

Confirmation of a bad night for Labour - especially as the exit polls predicted the Conservatives wouldn't do this well here - and the most important result so far.

1.10am: 5 things we know

James Kirkup with his 1am update:

So far, none of the actual results have suggested that that stunning exit poll is wrong. The near-total collapse in the Lib Dem vote is looking like being a decisive factor in the overall result. Instead of switching to Labour as Ed Miliband had hoped, it looks like a lot of former Lib Dems have actually gone to Ukip. The SNP surge in Scotland could be just as big as predicted: Labour is set to lose seats it used to hold with huge, huge majorities. The Tories may well win seats they didn't think were winnable. They could well have enough to try governing as a minority administration, relying on the support of the DUP on an ad hoc basis.

Midnight update: 5 things we know

The Telegraph's James Kirkup says this is what we know so far:

If the exit poll is even vaguely accurate, the polling industry is in deep trouble. Its models have systematically underestimated Tory support. The results in the Sunderland seats suggest that Ed Miliband's strategy of relying on disaffected Lib Dems to come to Labour could be faulty: the numbers suggest many former Lib Dems have actually gone to Ukip instead. That would mean success for the Ukip long-term plan to replace Labour in the north of England. It puts Ukip on course for a very respectable share of the vote: more than 10 per cent and close to 4 million votes in all. But it may not be much help to Nigel Farage in Thanet South in Kent. The Lib Dem strategy of focussing resources on defending around 30 seats does not appear to have been enough to hold back the tide: Nick Clegg and his party are facing something close to total destruction. Labour's attempts to question the accuracy of the exit poll will be tested in Nuneaton at around 1am.

10.55pm - the first seat to declare

Houghton & Sunderland South – traditionally the first seat to declare and safe Labour territory. It's an increased majority for the Labour candidate, but the Lib Dems have collapsed (beaten by the Greens) and Ukip have come second:

Labour: 21,218 votes (55%)

Ukip:8,280 votes (22%)

Conservative: 7,105 votes (18%)

10pm exit poll

The Tories are on course for victory, according to the Ipsos MORI/GfK NOP exit poll, published at 10pm, based on a 20,000 sample. It shows:

Conservatives: 316, up 9.

Labour 239, down 19

SNP: 58

Liberal Democrats: 10

Ukip: 2

Remember 326 MPs are needed for a majority. A coalition with the Lib Dems - or a minority governemnt? FInd out here what actually happens in the key constituencies. We'll update this page as the night goes on ...