Sixth Review of UK Parliament Constituencies

Sixth Review index | Initial Proposals | Revised Proposals | Cessation | Resources | Electorate data | Consultation

In January 2013, Parliament amended the legislation governing our Sixth Review of UK Parliament Constituencies. As a result, we stopped work on the Review and will not be completing it.

The revised legislation requires us to undertake our next review of UK Parliament constituencies using the electoral register from 1 December 2015, and to submit our report on that review during September 2018. The legislation governing our reviews of UK Parliament constituencies is the Parliamentary Constituencies Act 1986. The current text of the Parliamentary Constituencies Act 1986 is available on the Legislation page of our website. The text of the legislation as it applied at the start of the Sixth Review is available on the Resources section of the Sixth Review pages of this website.

Since revised constituencies resulting from our Review will not now be introduced, we expect that the next general election to the UK Parliament, due to take place in May 2015, will be contested using the UK Parliament constituencies that have existed in Scotland since 2005.

We began the Sixth Review in March 2011 after the passage of the Parliamentary Voting System and Constituencies Act 2011, and the publication of the electorate data required for the review. The legislation required that there would be 52 constituencies in Scotland: 50 covering the mainland council areas, Orkney and Shetland constituency and Na h-Eileanan an Iar constituency.

The Review was being carried out simultaneously for the whole of the United Kingdom by the 4 parliamentary Boundary Commissions, and would have resulted in the number of constituencies for the United Kingdom being 600. We expected to submit our recommendations for constituencies in Scotland before 1 October 2013 and for the resulting constituencies to be used in the General Election in May 2015.