The Labour party knew it was behind in the polls from as early as last year, according to an internal pollster.

James Morris, who worked for Labour from when Ed Miliband was elected as leader in 2010 until the general election, said public polling showed a much more favourable position than the party's internal data, both in the run-up to and during the campaign.

He said Labour's own polls showed they were seven points lower than those made available to the public in the run-up to last Thursday's election which saw the Conservatives scoop a majority.

Scroll down for video

James Morris, who carried out internal polls for Labour, said the party knew it was behind in the election polls from as early as last year. Ed Miliband (pictured) resigned immediately after the Conservatives won a majority

James Morris, who is a partner at Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research, said the Labour party knew all along it was 'trailing in the polls' and was always seven points behind what the public opinion polls portrayed

Just hours after the result was announced, Mr Miliband stepped down as party leader, insisting he took full responsibility for Labour's failing.

Public polls in the run-up to the election regularly showed Labour just a point or two behind the Tories, indicating that they may have had a chance to get into power in some form or another.

However, Mr Morris, who is a partner at Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research, said the party knew all along it was 'trailing in the polls'.

He told the BBC's Newsnight: 'Throughout that time, the Labour party knew it was starting in a much more troublesome place than the public polls made it appear.

'We would find public polls with Labour in the low forties, while our internal polls would have Labour maybe seven points lower than that.

'There was a lot of argument about when crossover would come, when the Tories would retake the lead, pollsters publicly saying maybe that would come in January this year or Easter.

'The Labour Party knew that in fact happened after conference last year 2014. That's what led the party to launch the campaign so strongly on fiscal responsibility and immigration and have such a disciplined message focus running out of November last year, perhaps into the short campaign.'

Ed Miliband (pictured outside his north London home with wife Justine and their two children) resigned as Labour leader following the election and said he took full responsibility for the party's defeat to the Tories

The claims came as David Miliband delivered a withering assessment of his brother Ed's failed strategy, saying the Labour party had appeared to go backwards under his leadership.

The former foreign secretary said the party had suffered a 'devastating' reverse in last week's election and that voters 'didn't want what was being offered to them' by Labour.

Harriet Harman, who is currently acting Labour leader, addressed the party's MPs at Westminster for the first time since the election yesterday.

She acknowledged the current situation was not one anyone had wanted to be in and said: 'We have got to look deep in our souls, but we shouldn't open our veins.'

She also told MPs that she had commissioned a 'forensic analysis' of what went wrong and warned there was 'frustration' at the amount of 'commentating' that had been going on within the party.

Harriet Harman, acting Labour leader (pictured) addressed the party's MPs at Westminster for the first time since their disastrous election yesterday

Labour is considering three approaches for staging the contest to succeed Mr Miliband, who is currently on holiday in Ibiza, with a final decision to be taken by the ruling national executive later today.

The options are a short campaign with the result decided on July 31, a longer campaign with the new leader chosen one or two weeks before the party conference in September, or using conference as a final hosting with a ballot after that.

So far, shadow health minister Liz Kendall is the only contender to have thrown her hat into the leadership election ring.

Others tipped to do so are shadow business secretary Chuka Umunna, shadow education secretary Tristram Hunt, shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper and shadow health secretary Andy Burnham.

Meanwhile, Walthamstow MP Stella Creasy has indicated she is open to putting her name forward for the position of deputy leader of the party.

Yesterday, Ms Harman, moved to fill the gaps in the shadow cabinet caused by the ousting of shadow chancellor Ed Balls and shadow foreign secretary Douglas Alexander, replacing them with Chris Leslie and Hilary Benn.

Labour veteran Lord Falconer of Thoroton also returns to the frontline as shadow justice secretary to take on Michael Gove over the new Government's plans to scrap the Human Rights Act.

Meanwhile, Mr Miliband is now contemplating life away from the political frontline and the prospect of a job outside politics for the first time in his adult life.

Asked after the election campaign what experience he had of life 'outside politics', Mr Miliband spoke about working as 'an economic advisor in the Treasury' and teaching 'government and economics' at Harvard University. He also briefly worked as a journalist on a political TV programme.