Tomorrow, you face one of the biggest political decisions of your life. The stakes could not be higher. Our economic recovery is at risk. Our shared British values of tolerance, generosity and respect for others are under threat. And our United Kingdom is at risk of being pulled apart.

Everybody knows that no one is going to win this election outright – even if David Cameron and Ed Miliband won’t admit it. So what really matters is who they have by their side in Government.

Ask yourself this: do you want Nigel Farage walking through the door of No 10? Do you want Alex Salmond sat at the Cabinet table? Or do you want me and the Liberal Democrats?

Without enough Liberal Democrat MPs to keep the next Government safe, stable and fair, either Ed Miliband or David Cameron will be left to run a messy and unstable minority Government, dependent on the SNP on the one hand or Ukip and the DUP on the other.

We will bring a heart to a Conservative Government and a brain to a Labour one. The Liberal Democrats will always put the good of the country first and provide stability and fairness, just as we have done for the last five years. That means ensuring three things: stability, decency and unity.

Look at what happened to those countries where they didn’t bring stability to the economy. Huge cuts to the public sector. A crisis for young people. In Greece and Spain, half of all young people are still unemployed. That could have been us.

That’s why I will never apologise for putting country before party and bringing stability to our country. Stability means not risking your job or our economy. It means not slashing the schools, hospitals and public services you rely on. And it means not letting the Government lurch away to the extremes with excessive cuts or reckless borrowing.

General Election 2015: The alternative power list







18 show all General Election 2015: The alternative power list

































1/18 Rick Edwards He may have started his career as a T4 pinup - best known for saying “awkward” and “now, for more Friends” - but Rick Edwards has re-launched his career as a politico. Edwards' book None Of The Above was published this year, and he was praised for making the prospect of voting and getting involved in politics exciting for young people.

He gave a TED talk last summer, in which he gave suggestions for how politicians could get under-24s to become passionate about drawing a cross next to a candidate's name.

2/18 Ant and Dec The Geordie cheeky-chappy TV presenters recently took a turn as political pundits when they discussed their disillusionment with the Labour Party in February.

Ant McPartlin said: “I voted Labour all my life but last election I voted Tory because I was thoroughly disillusioned with the Labour government. Now I'm thoroughly disillusioned with a coalition government.

”I feel we're both staunchly Labour and would vote Labour if we could, but I don't know what their philosophy is any more.“

Declan Donnelly added: ”I'm not sure I could picture him [Ed Miliband] as prime minister.“ Getty Images

3/18 Cheryl Fernandez-Versini The singer gave a candid interview about her political beliefs, saying that as she paid a "f**king lot of tax" she was obliged to pay careful attention to what each party is saying.

Fernandez-Versini, who normally supports the Labour party, told the Telegraph: "I’ve always been Labour all my life but I want to hear what [the other parties have] got to say for myself. Now that I’m a mature woman." Sport Relief/Gary Moyes

4/18 Jack Monroe A food blogger who spent years on the poverty line struggling to raise her son as a single mother, Jack Monroe has come out as a supporter of the Green Party.

In 2014, Monroe was mired in controversy after saying that David Cameron uses "stories about his dead son as misty-eyed rhetoric to legitimise selling our NHS". Her contract blogging for Sainsbury's was not renewed.

5/18 Armando Iannucci The Thick Of It creator has been a loud voice for reminding people to vote, and believes that if you don't go to the polling station on 7 May, you're more likely to be penalised by whoever comes to power.

A supporter of the Liberal Democrats in the 2010 election, Iannucci has said he doesn't know who to back this time around, but has been critical of the Tory party's attempted takedown of the SNP. Getty Images

6/18 Simon Cowell X Factor founder Cowell said that David Cameron had the “substance and the stomach to navigate us through difficult times”. Getty

7/18 Eddie Izzard A staunch Labour supporter, comedian Eddie Izzard has been on the campaign trail with the party's candidates from Southwark to Crewe.

Izzard has said he will stand as the Labour candidate for Mayor of London in 2020 and has been a party donor since 1998. During the 2015 campaign, he has been dismissive of what he believes is the Conservative party flaunting their wealth by erecting giant billboards. Reuters

8/18 Al Murray the Pub Landlord South Thanet’s finest, comedian Murray is running against Nigel Farage in his constituency. Leading new party Free United Kingdom Party, Murray’s policies include bricking up the Channel Tunnel and giving the public a British moon on a British stick. almurray

9/18 Russell Brand Despite famously saying there was no point in voting, Brand has now urged his followers to vote for Green MP Caroline Lucas in Brighton, and told the rest of England "You gotta vote Labour".

Brand's YouTube channel The Trews has prompted debate, and he hit back at David Cameron describing him as a joke, saying that he didn't think there was anything funny about the Tories cutting public services. BBC

10/18 Joey Essex The Only Way Is Essex star – famed for wearing a watch around his ankle and shoes a size too small so they don’t turn up at the toes – has now dipped his toe into politics. Essex (real name) interviewed Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg for ITV. He didn’t learn a lot, but reckons voting is “reem”. Getty Images

11/18 Robin Grey – aka David Cameron’s favourite busker In April, as David Cameron strolled through Alnwick, Northumberland, a ukulele-playing man who told the Prime Minister to "f*** off back to Eton".

That ukulele player was Robin Grey. He told The Independent: "I started singing it ('f*** off back to Eton') [and] I was like, that's a bit crass, I thought I could do better than that. But I just kept on going, because it was coming from the heart." Kiran Moodley

12/18 Steph & Dom from Gogglebox The super-posh couple from Sandwich staged an interview with Ukip leader Nigel Farage. Very little actually came out of the debate – apart from Farage spilling a drink down his slacks – but the couple got on with him like a house on fire.

While the couple never expressed their political allegiances, they managed to humanise Farage even more, and we can't exactly see them voting Green at the polls. Channel 4

13/18 Royal baby The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s daughter Princess Charlotte could sway the election in favour of the Conservatives as people will be happy with the status quo. If it was a boy called Edward, Tories had worried it could sway the public in favour of Labour leader Ed Miliband. Getty Images

14/18 Myleene Klass The Hear’Say singer turned businesswoman gave Ed Miliband the grilling of a lifetime, saying that his proposals for mansion tax were unfair, and that: “You can’t just point at things and tax them.”

15/18 Madonna Posting a picture of Margaret Thatcher, the singer showed her support for the often-controversial Conservative Prime Minister. Apparently free milk in schools and miners rights are less important than a de-regulated financial market to the Like A Virgin singer. Getty Images

16/18 Martin Freeman Bilbo Baggins has poked his head out of his Hobbit home to endorse the Labour party. Freeman has filmed passionate messages for the public to encourage people to vote for Miliband’s party.

17/18 Gary Barlow The Take That singer endorsed the Conservatives in the 2010 election, joking: “I've only known David Cameron for about year. In fact, I was slightly worried at first, because he thought Ronan Keating was part of Take That.” Getty Images

18/18 Caitlin Moran Perhaps the essential Twitter follow, and a booming voice for the left in Britain. Times columnist Moran constantly writes thought-provoking articles about women and being working class.

The Britain I want us to be is the open-hearted, open-minded, tolerant country that we are when we are at our best. But there is nothing decent about making the next generation pay for the mistakes of this one, as Labour will. There is nothing decent about penalising the most vulnerable people in our society, as the Conservatives will. And there is nothing decent about blaming foreigners and immigrants for all our ills, as Ukip does.

The Liberal Democrats will always stand up for unity against those who seek to pull us apart. We won’t divide our communities, like Ukip. We won’t divide our society, like the Conservatives. And we won’t rip our country apart, like the SNP.

I want a Britain where, no matter what your background, you have the opportunity to reach your potential. A Britain that remains an open-minded, open-hearted, generous country. A Britain with a stronger economy and a fairer society; where we can finish the job of balancing the books, but do it fairly; where we can invest in education and the NHS; where we can cut taxes for millions of working people and give a fair deal to our public sector workers; and where we can protect our environment for future generations.

Only the Liberal Democrats can make sure the next government keeps Britain on track. Every Liberal Democrat MP makes Labour’s reckless borrowing less likely. Every Liberal Democrat MP makes George Osborne’s ideological cuts less likely. And every Liberal Democrat MP is a barrier between Nigel Farage and Alex Salmond and the door to 10 Downing Street. Every Liberal Democrat vote and every Liberal Democrat MP will be dedicated to building a stable economy, a decent society and a united country.