Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Labour has said it is looking into allegations that members of the public are unable to contact Middlesbrough MP Stuart Bell.

Fresh questions about his workrate have now been raised after the Evening Gazette made 100 phone calls to his home in the town and Westminster office without anyone answering.

However, the 73-year-old - who has represented Middlesbrough since 1983 - told BBC Radio Tees he was bewildered by the criticism.

“We have absolutely no record of this person calling,” he said.

“It’s a total mystery to me.

“We do have answer machines because we get so many calls but every call that is made and every message that is left is responded to.

“We have three staff who work full-time on handling constituency matters - letters, emails, text messages, personal interviews.

“I meet people every Friday in Middlesbrough, I go to their homes, I’m on the council estates.

Explaining why no surgeries have been held for constituents since 1997, Sir Stuart said: “I have been attacked twice in my surgery. The person who attacked me still threatens me to this day, and threatened me during the general election.

“We found another way of dealing with it which is personal contact in the homes of the people who need to see me. Every Friday I’m on a council estate talking to people.

The Labour Party said it would be “totally unacceptable” if constituents had been unable to contact their MP.

“Ed Miliband and the Labour Party expect the highest standards from Labour representatives,” a spokeswoman said.

“It is totally unacceptable if the public cannot reach their MP.

“A number of allegations have been raised and these will be discussed with Sir Stuart.”

Sir Stuart was a long-serving member of the powerful House of Commons Commission, and played a key role as the body fought to avoid disclosing MPs’ expenses details. He stepped down from the committee last year.

It is understood that Sir Stuart met Labour chief whip Rosie Winterton yesterday to discuss the allegations.

He is now expected to write a letter to Mr Miliband setting out his position on contact with constituents.