The Green Party said it has taken a decisive step forward in this election as Caroline Lucas increased her majority in Brighton Pavilion and the party more than quadrupled its vote to over a million across the country.

Ms Lucas, who won 22,871 votes, or 42 per cent of the vote, comfortably beat her main opponent, Labour's Purna Sen, with 14,904, despite fears that an unpopular Green Council in Brighton & Hove could chip away at her support.

"In 2010, Brighton Pavilion showed that a different kind of politics is possible. That you can stand firm by your principles and be elected," Ms Lucas said after the vote announcement.

"And in re-electing me tonight Brighton has made history again. But there is not a moment to lose... the urgency of a strong, clear Green voice in Parliament has never been greater," she added.

The party also came second in four seats, including Bristol West, where Darren Hall received the biggest ever upswing in a General Election in England and Wales - taking the Green vote there up 23 per cent to 26.8 per cent.

Best General Election 2015 quotes







10 show all Best General Election 2015 quotes

















1/10 1. "Am I tough enough? Hell, yes, I'm tough enough." Ed Miliband bats away suggestions he would be too weak on the international stage. It likely to go down as one of the quotes we remember this election by. Matthew Lewis/Getty Images

2/10 2. "If I'm getting lively about it, it's because I feel bloody lively about it." David Cameron attempts to prove how passionate he is about wanting a second term as Prime Minister after Tory donors criticised his lack of enthusiasm. AFP

3/10 3. "Oh it's crats? I thought it was Liberal Demo-cats" Reality TV star Joey Essex is taught a thing or two during his meeting with Nick Clegg. PA

4/10 4. "Brain fade" Green party leader Natalie Bennett gave what was described as the "worst political leader's interview ever" on LBC Radio as she fails to answer how the Greens would pay for its ambitious housing policies. LBC/YouTube

5/10 5. "We're a shining example of a country where multiple identities work. Where you can be Welsh and Hindu and British, Northern Irish and Jewish and British, where you can wear a kilt and a turban, where you can wear a hijab covered in poppies. Where you can support Man Utd, the Windies and Team GB all at the same time. Of course, I'd rather you supported West Ham" David Cameron experienced his own brain fade when he forgot which football team he supported. Getty Images

6/10 6. “This is a real career-defining … country-defining election that we face in less than a week’s time” The Prime Minister made another gaffe when he made it sound like the election was all about himself. BBC

7/10 7. “Ed Miliband stabbed his own brother in the back to become Labour leader. Now he is willing to stab the United Kingdom in the back to become prime minister.” Defence Secretary Michael Fallon launched a vicious personal attack on Ed Miliband. PA

8/10 8. "Ajockalypse Now." The colourful term used by Boris Johnson to describe a Labour government propped up by the SNP. JUSTIN TALLIS/AFP/Getty Images

9/10 9. “The SNP are openly racist. The anti-English hostility, and the kind of language that is used about and towards English people, is totally extraordinary.” Nigel Farage launches an attack on Nicola Sturgeon and her SNP party. AFP/Getty Images

10/10 10. "Terms are like Shredded Wheat. Two are wonderful, three might be too many." David Cameron rules out a third term as Prime Minister. Getty Images

Green leader Natalie Bennett, who came third in her Holborn & St Pancras constituency, said: "The Green surge has only just begun....The fight for a fairer, more democratic voting system begins today."