Get politics updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Britain has been left reeling as three party leaders resign in just 52 minutes.

First it was Nigel Farage's turn. Then it was Nick Clegg's.

Last was Ed Miliband. At 12.14pm, he told activists he had to shoulder all the blame for Labour's shocking performance in the polls.

It's an hour which will go down in history as Britain's landscape changes forever, choosing what Nick Clegg called 'the politics of Us vs Them'.

And the hour ended with what the nation expected least of all - a Tory majority.

This is what the party leaders said.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Follow all the latest reaction to the general election results in our live blog

11.22am: Nigel Farage

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Nigel Farageless than an hour after he was defeated in his bid to become an MP.

The anti-EU leader lost out to Tory rival Craig Mackinlay by nearly 3,000 votes in South Thanet.

He vowed to quit as leader if he lost - but didn't rule out standing as his own replacement in just a few months' time.

He told supporters: "I'm going to take the summer off, enjoy myself a bit, not do much politics at all and there will be a leadership election for Ukip in September.

"And I will consider over the summer whether to put my name forward."

Earlier he was stony-faced as he said at the South Thanet count: "Many of you may think I'm having a bad day.

"But let me tell you - 5 years ago on election day I was in intensive care after an air crash so compared to that it feels pretty damn good".

Farage polled 16,026 votes to the 18,838 won by Tory Craig Mackinlay. Labour's Will Scobie won 11,740 votes.

Comedian Al Murray - in his guise as the pub landlord - was visibly shocked by the result and his jaw hung open on stage.

He won just 318 votes after drawing his manifesto on the back of a fag packet.

(Image: Reuters)

Farage added "there was an earthquake in this election and it happened north of the border, it happened in Scotland."

And he congratulated David Cameron for winning a Tory majority, something he 'never thought was possible'.

He added: "I think the time has come has come for real political change" and said Ukip will bring it about.

He referred to his impending resignation by saying: "On a personal level I feel an enormous weight has been lifted from my shoulders.

"I've never felt happier."

11.34am - Nick Clegg

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Nick Clegg quit as Lib Dem leader with a heart-rending attack on the forces of 'fear and grievance' that have left Britain in 'grave jeopardy'.

He looked close to tears as he told party activists the rise of Ukip and the SNP meant 'liberalism has lost'.

"The politics of nationalism, of identity, of Us vs Them is now on the rise," he declared.

"This is a very dark hour."

The Liberal Democrats won just eight seats - the fewest in their history - as voters took a stinging revenge for Clegg's betrayal of the pledge to axe tuition fees.

(Image: Reuters)

But Clegg was defiant, telling activists he'd be judged kindly in the history books for saving the country at a time of crisis.

A visibly choked and emotional Mr Clegg said: "Clearly the results have been immeasurably more crushing and unkind than I could ever have feared.

"For that I must take full responsibility and therefore I announce I will be resigning as leader of the Liberal Democrats.

"For the last seven years it's been a privilege and unlimited honour to lead a party of the most resilient, courageous and remarkable people.

"The Liberal Democrats are a family. I want to thank every member, every campaigner, every councillor and every parliamentarian.

(Image: Sky News)

"It is simply heartbreaking to see so many friends and colleagues who've served their constituencies so diligently over the years abruptly lose their seats due to forces beyond their control."

Clegg kept his Sheffield Hallam seat after winning Tory tactical votes but lost all his key henchmen - including David Laws, Vince Cable, Simon Hughes and Danny Alexander.

He claimed the results were 'part payment' for 'every family who's more secure because of jobs we helped create' and 'every gay couple who know that their love is worth no less than anyone else's'.

"Now I hope at least our losses can be endured with a little selfless dignity too," he added.

"We will never know how many lives we changed for the better because we had the courage to step up at a time of crisis.

"But we have done something that can never be undone.

"We leave Britain a stronger, fairer and more liberal country than it was five years ago.

"I think the history books will judge our country kindly for the service we sought to provide to the nation.

(Image: Getty)

"To have served my country at a time of crisis is an honour that will stay with me forever.

"It is of course too early to give a considered account of why we have suffered the catastrophic losses we have and the party will have to reflect on these.

"But one thing to me seems clear.

"Liberalism here and across Europe is not faring well against the politics of fear.

poll loading Was Nick Clegg right to quit? 0+ VOTES SO FAR YES NO

"Years of social hardship since the crash of 2008... have led people to reach for new certainties.

"The politics of nationalism, of identity, of Us vs Them is now on the rise.

"This now brings our country to a very perilous point in our history where grievance and fear combine to drive our different communities apart.

"I hope our leaders across the UK realise the disastrous consequences for our way of life and the integrity of the UK if they continue to appeal to grievance and fear rather than hope.

"Britain's place in the world and the continued existence of the United Kingdom itself are now in grave jeopardy.

"Fear and grievance have won. Liberalism has lost. But it is more precious than ever and we must keep fighting for it.

"That is both the great challenge and the great cause that my successor will have to face.

"On the morning of the most crushing blow to the Liberal Democrats since our party was founded it's easy to imagine there is no road back. But there is.

"This is a very dark hour for our party but we cannot, we will not allow decent liberal values to be extinguished overnight.

"Our party will come back."

12.14pm: Ed Miliband

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

In an emotional speech at the party's London headquarters, Ed Miliband said his five-year term had to come to an end to give members to lick their wounds.

"This is not the speech I wanted to give today because I believe that Britain needed a Labour government," he said.

"I still do but the public voted otherwise last night.

"I take absolute and total responsibility for the result and our defeat at the election.

"I'm so sorry for all those colleagues who lost their seats."

(Image: Sky News)

Miliband's resignation will take place almost immediately - after today's 70th anniversary commemorations of VE Day.

Senior staff were said to be close to tears after Labour achieved nearly 100 fewer seats than the Tories, despite all the polls saying the parties were neck-and-neck.

Miliband thanked candidates, activists, and apologised to the giants who have had their careers ended - including shadow chancellor Ed Balls and Scottish Labour leader Jim Murphy.

"Britain needs a strong Labour party," he said. "Britain needs a Labour Party that can rebuild after this defeat and now it's time for someone else."

Harriet Harman - who he worked for 20 years ago and called "the best deputy leader anyone could hope for" - will take over temporarily.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Miliband said he was "looking forward to reacquainting myself" with wife Justine and sons Daniel and Sam.

He added: "Thank you to the people who met me on train stations at colleges in workplaces and schools. Thank you for sharing your stories with me.

"Thank you for the selfies, thank you for the support and thank you for the most unlikely cult of the 21st century - Milifandom.

"Today you will feel disappointed, even bleak.

"But while we may have lost the election the argument of our campaign will not go away. The issue of our unequal country will not go away."

(Image: ed_miliband/instagram)

In a jibe to the SNP he added: "There's more than unites us than divides us across the United Kingdom. All of us must rise to the challenge of keeping our country together."

And on his leadership he said: "Thank you for the privilege. I joined this party aged 17. I never dreamed I would lead it.

"It has been an incredible force for progress, from worker's rights to the NHS. And it will continue to be a force for progress.

"I'm truly sorry I did not succeed. I've done my best for nearly 5 years.

(Image: Getty)

"Now you have to show your responsibility... to pick yourself up and continue the fight.

"We've come back before and this party will come back again."

After 5 years of highs and lows, Mr Miliband's announcement fires the starting gun on the race to replace him as Labour leader.

The bookies' favourite is shadow health secretary Andy Burnham, but Yvette Cooper - whose husband Ed Balls has lost his seat - is also in the frame.

Read about all the runners and riders here.

Miliband pleaded his fellow MPs to lead the race with "the same decency, civility and comradeship with which we believe the country should be run".

Live seat numbers 326 needed for majority Conservatives Theresa May 318 Labour Jeremy Corbyn 262 snp Nicola Sturgeon 35 Lib Dems Tim Farron 12 DUP 10 Sinn Fein 7 Plaid Cymru 4 Green 1 UKIP 0 UUP 0 Other 1 Undeclared 0

He added: "The course of progress and social justice is never simple or straightforward.

"Change happens because people don't take no for an answer. They keep demanding change.

"I believe it isn't simply leaders who achieve change. It's people who make change happen.

"I will never give up on that idea, I will never give up on that cause, I will never give up on fighting for the Britain I believe in.

"I will always be there in that cause with all of you."