'It's too dangerous to meet my constituents': Labour MP Stuart Bell tries to justify not holding a surgery for 14 YEARS

Stuart Bell insists he is willing to meet constituents 'by appointment'

He pays his wife £35,000 a year to manage his 'office' out of a total staff bill of £83,000



A veteran politician branded 'Britain's laziest MP' said yesterday that he hasn't held a surgery for his constituents for 14 years because he fears being attacked.

Sir Stuart Bell, 73, said that after a member of the public 'attacked him twice' during surgeries he decided to hold meetings only by appointment.

The Labour MP for Middlesbrough denied being idle after a newspaper investigation found that of 100 phone calls made to his office by reporters posing as constituents, not one was answered by his staff.

Family affair: Sir Stuart pays his wife Margaret £35,000 a year to work as his office manager

Under pressure: Sir Stuart Bell may have to explain to senior Labour figures why he has not held a constituency surgery since 1997

This is despite Sir Stuart claiming around £83,000 a year for three staff: two at Parliament, and his wife Margaret, who is paid £35,000 a year and works for him from his Middlesbrough home. Labour leader Ed Miliband said it was 'totally unacceptable' for the party's MPs to fail to respond to constituents' calls, and sources said the MP could face disciplinary proceedings.

But yesterday Sir Stuart said it was 'absurd and ridiculous' to say he could not be reached. 'I had surgeries many years ago, but I was attacked twice and the same person threatened my son,' he said on Radio 2's Jeremy Vine show. 'The same person is still around, he threatened me during the general election and he's still there to this day.'

He believes it is 'most assuredly' more dangerous for MPs now than 14 years ago.

FAMILIES STILL ON THE GRAVY TRAIN

Nearly one in five MPs are still employing family members, despite widespread criticism of the practice following the expenses scandal. There are 136 MPs paying a total of around £3million a year to relatives to work for them, according to research by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism. Of those, 27 MPs only entered the Commons at last year’s general election when they were aware of the uproar the issue caused in the previous Parliament. The majority employ their spouses as secretaries and office managers, paying them on average around £25,000 in the financial year ending in April.

'When I did hold surgeries I had to have a policeman there, and now it's a different world,' he said. 'So you deal with constituents in a way that is effective and positive for them and they don't complain, believe me.' Sir Stuart said all inquiries were dealt with 'promptly', adding: 'We've three full-time staff who answer telephone inquiries.

'I meet all of my constituents who need to see me on an appointment basis, which is a very common thing these days.'

But critics expressed astonishment that he appeared to be so inaccessible.

Emma Boon, of the TaxPayers' Alliance, said: 'Taxpayers write Sir Stuart Bell a whopping pay cheque for working as an MP, it's part of his role to meet local residents and represent them in Parliament.

'With this apparent poor record in responding to calls it's no surprise that some are branding him Britain's laziest MP.

'If he can't be bothered to do the job he's paid for then perhaps it's time for a by-election in Middlesbrough.'

An aide at Sir Stuart's Commons office confirmed that the MP had discussed the matter with Labour chief whip Rosie Winterton.



Residents in Mr Bell's Middlesbrough constituency have complained that the MP is uncontactable