It’s a grim moment for progressive politics in our country. The Tories have won. Labour’s share of the national vote is slightly up on 2010, but its seats are well down. The Liberal Democrats have suffered a tsunami of lost votes, MPs, and councillors. They have been wiped out as a serious force across vast swathes of Britain, with the lowest number of seats and votes at a general election since 1970 under Jeremy Thorpe. Over half of the Lib Dem candidates polled under 5% and lost their deposits.

In 2010, we Liberal Democrats went into government in good faith and did our best early on to improve the economy, sort out the banks, make tax fairer, protect overseas aid and generally restrain Tory rabidity across the board. But we got nowhere on reforming our tainted political system, cleaning up party funding and electing a democratic second chamber instead of our appointed, overstuffed House of Lords.

Its 830 members make it the second largest second chamber in the world, after the House of Chiefs in Tonga. The process for appointing new peers to change the balance of numbers in the Lords after each general election just puffs it up ever faster. There are now 12 Liberal Democrat peers for every MP, so hundreds more peers of other parties should be appointed to redress the balance. But the system of party leaders appointing peers personally is institutionally corrupt – and all too often, it’s financially corrupt too. All three parties have sold peerages to people with no record of public or political service except a signature on a cheque.

It is also a grim moment for our future as a United Kingdom in the European Union. The Conservatives gained their overall majority by stoking up English and Welsh people’s fears and implying that Scottish MPs would dominate Westminster. And their pledge of a referendum on Europe by 2017, whether reform negotiations have made progress or not, is deeply damaging for British business and jobs. It is also a timebomb ticking away under the unity of the UK. Scotland and Wales could easily vote to stay in the EU, with England voting to leave. It would then be desperately difficult to deny Scotland a second independence referendum.

The results of this election are monstrously unfair, not just to the Liberal Democrats (with 1% of the seats on 8% of the vote). The Liberal Democrats, Greens and Ukip together got 25% of the votes cast, but only 10 MPs – 1.5% of the House of Commons. That’s a disgrace to democracy, whatever your politics. And the SNP scooped up 56 MPs – 95% of the Scottish seats – despite getting less than half the votes cast – unfair to the Scottish Conservatives as well as Labour.

Now that Labour have had a shocking Scottish lesson on the dangers of first-past-the-post, all of us on the left of centre must work together to win a genuinely fair voting system and build a progressive alliance, issue by issue and seat by seat, so we can keep Britain in Europe and make the case for comprehensive and constitutional and social reform.

If we fail, I fear for the future of the United Kingdom.