Photo: Charlie Morris

At this rate, Ukip will win 4.5 million votes in May. In 2010 they didn’t manage 1 million. But despite this rise, they are forecast to win only a handful of seats.

The Lib Dems have collapsed in the polls. In 2010 they won over nearly a quarter of voters. They have since lost two-thirds of them, and are set to win half as many votes as Ukip in May. But they are likely to win around 30 seats.

And after polling just 1 per cent in 2010, the Greens are now polling around 7 per cent. They will win nearly as many votes as the Lib Dems in May – and just 1 seat.

As for the SNP? They are on course to win nearly half of the Scottish vote, but Scotland is just 8 per cent of the UK: they will still only win around a million votes in May – equivalent to 3 per cent in the national polls. Yet they are set to win more than 50 seats.

Welcome to how we elect people in the UK.

h



h

Do I need to be employed to apply for a guarantor loan?

An applicant must have some kind of income in order to successfully apply for a guarantor loan, whether that be employment, retirement or benefits.

Will interest increase over time?

With most loans you will be paying a fixed interest rate over the cause of your repayment. However it is always worth checking the small print just to make sure. In most cases the only thing that will cause you pay back additional money will be missing out on a payment

Can you top up your loan?

It is possible to top up your loan, however any top up will need to be cleared with the guarantor first.

Will I get a cooling off period?

Yes as with most loans you will have a grace period where you can return the money if you change your mind. This will vary between companies but is generally around 2 weeks.

How will the guarantor be affected if the borrower defaults on payment?

Companies will always try and contact the borrower first as situations become more complicated once a third party is involved. If the borrower cannot be reached or are unable to provide a suitable payment plan then the guarantor will be asked to step in. If neither borrower nor guarantor is able to pay, it will affect both credit ratings as well as potentially leading to legal proceedings.

There are 650 elections in May, not one big election. And the ‘First Post The Post’ system used in Britain rewards concentrated support. The Lib Dems used to suffer from this system – they would come second in hundreds of seats, and in more than Labour or the Tories.

The Lib Dems used to suffer from this system.

But now they’re benefitting from it (well, sort of – under PR they could win 40-50 seats; that’s how much the current system hurt them in 2010). Their national brand is collapsing, but they have “dug deep trenches in their traditional territories”. They have lots of concentrated support in places like the south-west, where they are holding off the Tories.

Now Ukip have taken up the second-place mantle. They are going to poll 15-20 per cent in hundreds of seats in May, but win only a handful.

Here’s how Ukip compare to the big parties. Would you say they were under-represented?

h



h

The Greens are in an equivalent, if less dramatic, situation. They could win 2 million votes in May – nearly as many as the Lib Dems – but are only polling above 25 per cent in Brighton Pavillion, where their former leader, Caroline Lucas, is running as a quasi-independent.

As for the SNP, they will only win around a million votes in May (although that’s out of 2.5 million Scots). A proportional seat total would be 25-30. For a while, that’s what most forecasts predicted for the party.

But forecasts are now in the 35 to 40 range, and we’re currently predicting more than 50. ‘First Past The Post’ rewards strength if it happens across the board: and the SNP appear to be strong across the country.

How do all six parties fare under the system? Here’s all you need to know in one graphic.

h



h