The Independent's frontpage today asks: "Is this Britain's laziest MP?" naming Sir Stuart Bell, the Labour MP for Middlesbrough, who has not held a surgery in his constituency since 1997. This week his local newspaper, the Teesside Evening Gazette, put in 100 calls to his home and parliamentary office and in the resulting story published on Tuesday, they claimed not to have got a single response. Bell has since said that there were no records of the calls, declaring it a "mystery". He maintains he runs his office form home and that constituents can contact him by phone but Labour HQ appear not to be too impressed. A source in Ed Miliband's office told me:

We take it very seriously. We expect the highest standard from MPs and one of the basic standards is that you meet your constituents. Stuart is sending a letter to Ed to explain his position and it's worth saying that he disputes the reports. We are in conversation and correspondence before we decide what to do next. There are a range of disciplinary actions of which that [withdrawing the party whip] is the top end.



It comes on the day that new research reveals that MPs are continuing to employ their family in their offices, paying them £3m of taxpayers' money, reopening the scar that the expenses episode left on the reputation of politicians.

We wanted to find a way to quantify MPs' workrates in order to identify the least active MPs and peers. You can look up your MP's records below. But can you tell us about your local MP's activities? How much of a presence are they in your community? Do you feel adequately represented in parliament? Are peers doing their jobs in the Lords?

Do you know of any local press cuttings relating to this, freedom of information requests about MPs' workload or other evidence to offer? Get in touch below the line, email polly.curtis@guardian.co.uk or contact me via Twitter @pollycurtis

The question

Who are Britain's laziest parliamentarians?

The evidence

It's impossible to quantify and compare constituency work but it is possible to measure MPs' activity in the Commons by the proportion of votes they attend each year. In the Lords, the number of days each peer has attended is also recorded.

The figures, supplied by my colleague Simon Rogers from the Guardian's Datablog, are below. You can download the full figures here.

The analysis

MPs have two jobs: constituency work and parliamentary duties. Bell has been an MP for nearly 30 years and has had a distinguished career in parliament as a frontbench spokesman on trade and industry in opposition and the spokesman for the Church of England in the House of Commons and member of the House of Commons commission until last year. He's part of a breed of politicians – also including the Tory Edward Leigh and Labour's Gerald Kaufman – who have been extremely active parliamentarians but not always maintained an office in their constituency. One measure of their parliamentary work is the proportion of votes they turn up to.

MPs

There are lots of caveats to make regarding the data: The Speaker and his deputies can't vote. Sinn Fein MPs do not attend Senior members of the government – Cameron, Clegg and Hague – are not expected to vote as regularly as others.

The non-participation rate of Gordon Brown (67.3% absence rate) has been criticised by the Conservatives. Bell's record doesn't cover him in glory, discounting frontbenchers, Northern Irish MPs, the Speaker and his deputies, he has the 10th worst attendance record with a 65.4% absence rate.

The average absence rate for votes across the Commons during January and February is 25.7%. By party Labour's do not attend rate is 33.9%, the Liberal Democrats 20.2% and Conservatives 17.2%. For the full breakdown of the figures by party visit the Datablog.

Lords

The average number of sessions attended between January and March this year by peers was 28.2 ranging from 67 who attended no days at all to 84 who attended 46 days.

Verdict

Labour's Roger Godsiff is MP who missed the most votes in our data, for January and February this year. In the Lords 67 peers (listed above) failed to attend a single session in Parliament in January to March this year.

A local newspaper to his Birmingham Hall Green constituency questioned Godsiff here on his poor attendance rate.

He told them:

I always spend Thursday and Friday back in Birmingham working in my constituency. I was out of the country attending my daughter's funeral earlier this month, but to give specific reasons, I would have to go through every vote. Sometimes I don't vote on specific issues deliberately. And when you are in opposition and the government has a substantial majority, you know perfectly well that you aren't going to be able to have an effect on every vote.

I have left a message on Godsiff's mobile phone asking to discuss his voting record and I'll update this blog if I get a response. Incidentally he appears to be out of the country. His mobile rang with an international dialling tone.



Labour appears to have the worst attendance rate of any of the main parties. Can anyone help us explain the different behaviour of the parties?

The media is often accused of dwelling on the negative, so gold stars go to Damian Hinds, Dan Byles, David Nuttall, Mike Weatherly, Philip Hollobone and Rebecca Harris who missed just 1.9% of votes over the period. In the Lords 84 peers were joint first place attending the highest number of 46 sessions in January to March this year

Many thanks for fantastic comments below the line. A lot of debate is focussing on the different voting rates of the parties. To recap, the figures we presented earlier showed that:

The average absence rate for votes across the Commons during January and February was 25.7%. By party, Labour's 'do not attend' rate is 33.9%, the Liberal Democrats 20.2% and Conservatives 17.2%.

The question arose about whether MPs always vote less frequently in opposition and @DBIV provided a link to data which suggests this is the case.

He wrote:

There are statistics for the average turnout in divisions of MPs by Party at http://countculture.wordpress.com/2008/09/17/how-often-do-mps-turn-up-for-work/ covering 1997 - 2008. The crude averages were 69.8% for Labour MPs, 64.7% for Liberal Democrat MPs, and 61.7% for Conservative MPs. Note the consistency in the graph.

@stevecov suggests new Tories are turning up to impress the frontbench and get a job. While @DBIV gives this explanation:

Opposition MPs are more likely to abstain in votes because they arise from amendments put forward by Conservative MPs pressing the Government to be more right-wing; Labour MPs are opposed but equally would not vote to support the Government's policy. This applied vice-versa when Labour were in power and the Conservatives abstained on amendments proposed by left-wing Labour MPs.

I was also fascinated to read @MGibb 's description of how MPs are rated on their activity in Uganda. He writes:

The Africa Leadership Institute published its first Parliamentary Scorecard for Uganda in 2007, and has issued one for each parliamentary session since. The general idea is to make the work of individual parliamentarians more transparent and easier to assess for the voting public. The scorecard collates a large amount of quantitative data. This includes attendance figures for both plenary and committee meetings, but also a count of their contribution to such meetings through questions, lines spoken, bills and amendments proposed, etc. There is also an attempt to measure constituency work through attendance and contributions to local council and constituency meetings. As the Scorecard has grown more important to MPs, I think they have also started trialling a system of self-reporting for constituency work. As has been noted, including by MPs, this methodology does not capture certain qualitative aspects of parliamentary work, such as the quality of an MP's contributions, but it is an interesting start.

I am really concerned by @stevecov 's suggestion that one MP who rates badly has actually been ill. We did attempt to avoid this by contacting party sources and have treated some of the data sensitively for this reason. If anyone has any information that can help us address any anomalies we've missed do get in touch by email polly.curtis@guardian.co.uk or contact me via Twitter @pollycurtis.

A quick update regarding the issue of MPs who were ill during the period that the statistics cover. Fabian Hamilton, the Labour MP for Leeds North East, has written in to complain that the figures unfairly reflect his performance because he was ill during the period. After discussion with the Guardian's readers' editor, we think the issue is best addressed here. Apologies to Mr Hamilton. As I have written elsewhere in this blog we did try to avoid such a problem by asking whether any MPs were known to have had cause to miss votes, and we have treated the data sensitively with regards to a number of other members. Many thanks to those who wrote in to alert us to the problem.

Many thanks also for all your emails. I had just over 40 from readers offering views on their MPs ranging from people who have had quite serious problems and have struggled to raise even an acknowledgment from their MP, to more than a handful singling out their member for praise in their dedication to representing their community.

Incidentally, Sir Stuart Bell issued a statement on Friday regarding the allegations made elsewhere about him. It says: