Former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, New Yorkers’ hero of the day, is seen at a lectern announcing, “The air quality is safe and acceptable.” Michael D. Brown, the erstwhile director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, comes off as relatively harmless, merely promising the federal government’s help.

The program’s revelations about the rewriting of E.P.A. publicity releases are particularly damning. A Sept. 16, 2001, statement about one contaminant originally stated that samples “showed levels of asbestos ranging from 2.1 percent to 3.3 percent” and that the agency “views a 1 percent level as a definition for asbestos-containing material.” That wording was changed to say, with an Orwellian touch, that samples “contained small percentages of asbestos” and described those levels as “slightly above the 1 percent trigger for defining asbestos material.” Cautionary information in some releases is deleted altogether.

These rewrites are openly, disapprovingly discussed here by Nikki L. Tinsley, the E.P.A.’s former inspector general.

Many victims speak on camera for themselves, discussing their early symptoms (like nosebleeds and hacking coughs) and their current battles with an array of serious illnesses.

Dr. Stephen M. Levin of Mount Sinai Hospital discusses the hospital’s screening program for World Trade Center responders and a report showing that more than half of those screened had serious respiratory problems. But the most powerful statement he makes is a simple one, about the workers’ fights to receive disability benefits and pay their medical bills: “These people deserve better than that.”

Last week the results of a new, larger Mount Sinai study were announced. This one, covering almost 10,000 workers, revealed that roughly 70 percent of them had new or worsened respiratory problems since Sept. 11, 2001.

It would be more difficult and even more frustrating to watch “Dust to Dust” if a Congressional subcommittee did not appear to be taking action, as of Friday. Representative Jerrold Nadler has introduced a bill to cover these sick workers, downtown residents and neighborhood schoolchildren under Medicare. Representative Carolyn B. Maloney has introduced a bill to reopen the Victim Compensation Fund to pay for those patients’ health care. Michael O. Leavitt, Secretary of Health and Human Services, has appointed Dr. John O. Agwunobi, assistant secretary for health, to lead a task force on the issue.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Meanwhile Mr. Baumann, who describes the cloud of smoke and debris at the beginning of the documentary, has heart disease, lung scarring and nascent emphysema. He has never smoked, he says, and has been a vegetarian for 30 years. “At 43 I’m having a quadruple bypass,” he says. “What’s causing that?”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

America Rebuilds II

It is not clear at first what a group of fresh-faced teenagers in Phillipsburg, Kan., could possibly be doing in “America Rebuilds II: Return to Ground Zero.” But as soon as they board the bus for their class trip to New York, we see their part in the future of ground zero. As tourists.

In this formulaic but fairly informative documentary, to be shown on PBS stations tonight, the students pack their bags, watch video of the World Trade Center attacks on the bus and reflect on the fact that the tallest building in their hometown is four stories. One girl recalls her terror that day because her father is a pilot for American Airlines. (She was soon reassured that he was safe.)

When the students finally reach the site, one boy observes, “You really don’t see the trauma” because it has been “wiped clean.” But the student’s tour guide, Lee Ielpi, makes an impression when he reveals that his son Jonathan, a firefighter, lost his life on Sept. 11, 2001, trying to save others.

That is the program’s only truly touching scene, but poignancy is hardly its primary goal. Most of the film is relentlessly upbeat, almost boosterish, even when anyone can read fear between the lines.

The first corporate tenants sign up for the new 7 World Trade Center building, and employees insist that they won’t suffer from anxiety going to work every day on a high floor. The building’s new, wider stairwells are shown, which is good, it is pointed out, because now firefighters have more space to run upstairs while frightened tenants pass them, going in the opposite direction.

Prospective tour guides for the disaster site go through training. Michael Arad’s winning design for the trade center memorial is shown: its has two waterfall fountains and underground stone walls bearing the names of the dead.

The first sign of conflict is over that design. Some family members don’t want their loved ones’ names underground. Others object to the underground setting because the vibration of subway trains will be felt by visitors to the memorial.

The program estimates a completion date of the entire new trade center complex by 2011. Just in time for the 10th anniversary of the tragedy that made it necessary.

DUST TO DUST

THE HEALTH EFFECTS OF 9/11

Sundance, tonight at 10, Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.

Heidi Dehncke-Fisher, director; Bruce Kennedy, producer.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

AMERICA REBUILDS II

RETURN TO GROUND ZERO

PBS, tonight at 9; check local listings.

Ken Mandel and Dan Polin, executive producers; Seth Kramer and Daniel A. Miller, producers and writers. Produced by Great Projects Film Company.