Since he appeared in Americans' living rooms as a figure of reassurance and grief five years ago, Rudy Giuliani's public image has been defined by his performance on Sept. 11, 2001. The day has made him one of the country's most popular men, rich and the front-runner, according to some polls, for the GOP nomination for President. But now his 9/11 aura is facing a challenge from critics who say he wasn't prepared for the attacks and downplayed health risks in the aftermath. His allies dispute the claims. But within his circle, some are worried that a political opponent could hit Giuliani where he's strongest. "The term being used within Giuliani's circle is 'Swift boat,'" said a Republican insider familiar with conversations among Giuliani's aides. The point of reference is attacks a group called Swift Boat Veterans for Truth launched in 2004 against presidential candidate John Kerry. Kerry's Vietnam service had been his main selling point to Democrats before it was called into question in a flood of detailed and often inaccurate allegations. Giuliani's aides are suspicious that memos about air quality that appeared recently in the press are timed to hurt his presidential bid. "It is curious: Why this year? Why not last year?

" said one aide. But Giuliani has also been caught off guard by a reality: Many of the workers who spent time near Ground Zero, including at least one of his top aides, have come down with respiratory and other illnesses doctors link to the air quality following the attacks. Giuliani and former Environmental Protection Agency chief Christie Whitman have traded blame over the fact that more workers didn't wear respirators. But it was Giuliani's old rival, Sen. Hillary Clinton, who helped organize research into the health impact of the towers' collapse. There's no "9/11 Families for Truth," no organized effort to damage Giuliani's national reputation. But the seeds of it may be sprouting. Sally Regenhard, whose firefighter son, Christian, died on 9/11, told the Daily News' Errol Louis that she intends to "Swift boat" Giuliani. "There's a large and growing number of both FDNY families, FDNY members, former and current, and civilian family members who want to expose the true failures of the Giuliani administration when it comes to 9/11," said Regenhard, who, citing a recent book by Wayne Barrett and Dan Collins, blames Giuliani for 9/11 communications breakdowns. The city's police and fire union presidents are also openly hostile to Giuliani, and agreed on New York 1 News recently that he shouldn't be called "America's Mayor.

" Giuliani supporters acknowledge some of the errors on 9/11, but dismiss them as hindsight. In response to air quality concerns, they point out that Giuliani, his future wife and his top aides spent many hours at Ground Zero with the rescue workers, and say they tried to persuade workers to wear respirators. "Rudy was there every day with his aides exposing himself to the same stuff," said a former aide. The city's white-shoe Republican establishment is uniting behind the party's attorney general candidate, Jeanine Pirro, at a Sept. 26 fund-raiser that organizers say is expected to raise more than $500,000. The host list includes New York Stock Exchange CEO John Thain, former Goldman Sachs chief John Whitehead, billionaire Nelson Peltz and other top national GOP donors. Queens State Sen. Malcolm Smith's bid to lead the Senate Democrats is drawing fire from the Democratic base. One prominent African-American Democrat, citing Smith's support for Mayor Bloomberg and other Republicans, said he'd campaign against him, saying, "He's spent more time being a Republican than a Democrat.

" And NARAL Pro-Choice New York head Kelli Conlin said she'd actively oppose him unless he "changes his ways, meets with us and does a full mea culpa.

" "It would certainly put a chill on our relationship [with the Senate Democrats] to have a leader who wasn't pro-choice," she said, citing his support for a 1999 ban on some late-term abortions. "It would be a chill with their donor base, too.

" Smith responded that he's "always been pro-choice" and that the ban would have allowed doctors' discretion. Also campaigning hard for the job are state Sens. Martin Dilan, Jeff Klein and Eric Schneiderman. bensmith@nydailynews.

com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!