It had also wanted to incorporate in any rebuilding a new South Ferry Station. That station, the southernmost on the line, has long been an anachronism, big enough to accommodate only the first five cars of modern subway trains and so tightly curved that a gap of about two feet remains between the platform and some train doors.

But yesterday, officials said any modernization of the station would be part of a second phase of rebuilding, one that would probably include the Cortlandt Station and that would be subject to the uncertainties of future federal aid and state and city budgets.

The rebuilding to begin now -- the cost of which officials would not speculate on yesterday -- is expected to be paid for with insurance money and with later help from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. That money will pay for restoring the line to the way it was before Sept. 11, but not for additional improvements, except adding elevators for disabled riders.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Still, even with the subtractions from New York City Transit's original wish list, the plan to restore service so quickly -- little more than a year after the worst damage ever to befall the subway -- was lauded yesterday by riders and officials.

''This important subway line carries more than 600,000 people a day to home or work, and restoration of service is critical to getting downtown Manhattan back on its feet,'' said Gov. George E. Pataki, in a statement. Mr. Pataki controls the M.T.A. board, which is expected to approve the plan at its next meeting.

Details are still being worked out, but it is likely that the reopening of the tunnels would make it possible to put several subway lines back on their old routes, with the 2 and 3 going to Brooklyn and the 1 and 9 terminating at South Ferry. After Sept. 11, subway planners had to scramble those lines, terminating the 3 in Manhattan and sending the 1 into Brooklyn in order to turn trains around efficiently. But the changes resulted in very unreliable service along much of the lines' routes.

''These lines, taken together, have a ridership probably equal to the population of Boston,'' said Gene Russianoff, staff lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign, a transit advocacy group. ''And we've gotten a tidal wave of complaints from riders about service on the lines over the last few months.''

''This sounds to me like the M.T.A. is making an intelligent choice,'' Mr. Russianoff added, ''considering the uncertainties of federal funding.''

About 575 feet of the line is totally collapsed, in two separate locations, but subway engineers have said that hundreds more feet are structurally unsound, with once-straight I-beams bent into curves and dozens of holes punched through the tunnel walls by falling debris. Before reconstruction can begin, workers will have to punch through thick concrete and steel bulkheads that were constructed in the days after the attack to prevent any flooding from spreading throughout the system.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Transit officials said yesterday that they planned to send out documents outlining the overall scope of work to contracting companies within the week. Bidding for the job -- which will most likely be modified, with only a small group of prequalified companies involved, to speed the process -- will begin this month. The company to perform the work is expected to be chosen by February.