Stocks dropped sharply today as trading resumed on Wall Street for the first time since last Tuesday's terrorist attack, wiping out billions of dollars in value from Corporate America's biggest names and sending the Dow Jones industrial average to its biggest one-day point loss ever.

A patriotic rally did not materialize, but neither did a more precipitous drop that might have halted trading under New York Stock Exchange circuit-breaker rules.

"I'm not surprised," said Alfred Kugel, investment strategist at Chicago-based Stein Roe & Farnham. "There was a certain amount of pent-up fear, caution and uncertainty, and people who felt that way were going to sell, no matter what happened."

Broader markets also fell sharply, with airline and many other transportation issues, retail, entertainment and technology stocks posting dramatic losses.

Dow industrials

The Dow Jones industrial average closed down more than 684 points, or more than 7 percent, closing below the 9000 mark at 8921, according to preliminary figures, on extraordinarily heavy New York Stock Exchange volume. That pushed the Dow to its lowest close since December 1998. The Dow's previous record one-day point drop was 617.78 points during the April 14, 2000, meltdown; the percentage drop, however, did not rank among the Dow's 10 biggest falls.

Despite the sharp sell-off, market watchers described Monday's activity as a remarkably normal resumption of trading after a four-day halt.

Nasdaq composite

The Nasdaq composite index ended down 109 points, or 6.5 percent, to 1586, leaving the already battered index at its lowest point since October 1998.

The Dow and Nasdaq indexes dropped about 6.5 percent shortly after trading opened, trimmed their losses by midday, but sank to new lows in the afternoon as a sharp intra-meeting cut in short-term interest rates by Alan Greenspan and other Federal Reserve policymakers failed to trigger buying.

A 10 percent drop in the Dow would have triggered a halt in trading under circuit breaker rules adopted by the New York Stock Exchange after the 1987 market crash.

The Fed and the European Central Bank cut their short-term interest rate targets by a half percentage point to ease credit conditions.

"There's a tremendous amount of money sloshing around," said Andy Busch, senior foreign exchange adviser at Harris Bank NBI in Chicago. "There's cheap money around."

Many of Corporate America's bluest chips were battered, despite widespread efforts to boost share prices. General Electric, Microsoft, Intel, AOL Time Warner, Boeing and American Express all posted substantial drops. Airlines were especially hard-hit, with United Airlines parent UAL Corp., American Airlines parent AMR Corp. and Delta Air Lines all falling by more than one-third.

Despite the sell-off, investments considered safe alternatives to stocks—Treasury securities, oil and gold—lost ground, as global investors realized that panic did not hit Wall Street.

The dollar, which has weakened against major foreign currencies, was stable. Japan intervened in foreign exchange markets to support the greenback.

In what could be pattern for major U.S. companies, entertainment giant Walt Disney took advantage of easier credit by borrowing $1 billion in bonds, in part to buy back its own shares. Disney sold off sharply Monday along with other transportation and entertainment stocks.

Dozens of major corporations, including Northbrook-based insurer Allstate Corp. and Chicago-based financial giant Bank One Corp., announced or speeded up share repurchase plans to bolster their stock prices.

Meanwhile, action by central banks appeared to have prevented interruptions in the financial service industry's payment system, where billions of dollars flow each day, Busch said.

Financial firms were hard-hit, despite lower interest rates, reflecting concern about insurance losses and the likelihood of a recession.

Credit card firms, faced with the prospect of declining consumer spending, lost ground. American Express was down more than 16 percent in mid-afternoon. Bank One, a major credit card issuer, was off 7 percent; it announced a $500 million share repurchase program.

Stocks linked to defense contracts rallied. Raytheon, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman and General Dynamics were among the winners.

So-called defensive stocks in the food and pharmaceutical sectors also advanced.

"The most important thing today was that the markets opened and function," said Peter McTeague, markets strategist for Greenwich Capital. "There's not any panic, and it doesn't seem like things are frozen up."