On the eve of New York’s crucial primary, another prominent Democrat broke ranks with President Obama over a bill to allow 9/11 families to sue Saudi Arabia.

Mayor de Blasio said Monday that he stands with Sen. Chuck Schumer, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, who have blasted Obama for trying to scuttle the legislation.

“Nowhere is the pain of Sept. 11, 2001, felt more deeply than here in New York City, where families across the five boroughs still struggle daily with the harrowing loss of their brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers, sons and daughters,” he said.

SAUDI ARABIA'S FINANCIAL INVOLVEMENT IN THE 9/11 ATTACKS: AN EXPLAINER

The mayor also said the government has “a responsibility to the family members of the deceased to provide avenues to information, compensation and closure, as well as hold responsible to the utmost extent any party complicit in the senseless loss of so many lives.”

Hillary Clinton said Monday that the Obama administration should seriously consider declassifying the 28 pages of Congress’ joint inquiry into intelligence failures around the 9/11 attacks. The report was issued in 2002, but those pages were held back by the Bush administration in the interest of national security. Some say the missing pages show Saudi Arabia’s involvement in the terror attacks.

Even Democrats are turning on President Obama over Saudi Arabia's possible ties to 9/11. (Pool/Getty Images)

“I think the administration should take a hard look at them and determine whether that can be done consistent with national security,” she said.

Her rival, Sanders, is also calling for the full release of those documents.

CLINTON, SANDERS TURN ON OBAMA BY SUPPORTING BILL TO ALLOW 9/11 KIN TO SUE SAUDI ARABIA

President Obama leaves for Saudi Arabia on Tuesday and will meet Saudi King Salman the following day.

Meanwhile, a top Obama aide who worked on a different inquiry, the 9/11 Commission Report that was released in 2004, said the Saudi government did not overtly support Al Qaeda leading up to the terror attacks, but that major figures in the country did.

Fifteen of the 19 hijackers in the Sept. 11 attacks were from Saudi Arabia. (Watts, Susan/KRT)

Ben Rhodes would not speak directly about the classified 28 pages of the report that have become the subject of new scrutiny.

“Without getting into that specifically, because that’s still classified, I think that it’s complicated in the sense that, it’s not that it was Saudi government policy to support Al Qaeda, but there were a number of very wealthy individuals in Saudi Arabia who would contribute, sometimes directly, to extremist groups, sometimes to charities that were kind of, ended up being ways to launder money to these groups,” he said on CNN’s podcast “The Axe Files.”

“So, a lot of the funding — and you know (Osama) Bin Laden himself was a wealthy Saudi — so a lot of the money, the seed money if you will, for what became Al Qaeda, came out of Saudi Arabia,” he added.

SAUDI ARABIA THREATENS TO PULL $750B FROM U.S. ECONOMY

The comments come as the Obama administration has taken heat for lobbying against the bill.

U.S. Deputy National Security Advisor Ben Rhodes said that while the Saudi Arabian government didn’t directly fund terrorists, it didn’t stop wealthy individuals from contributing. (KEVIN LAMARQUE/REUTERS)

The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, which the Senate Judiciary Committee voted to recommend earlier this year, would take away immunity from foreign governments in cases “arising from a terrorist attack that kills an American on American soil.”

Fifteen of the 19 hijackers were from Saudi Arabia.

The Saudi Arabian government has threatened to sell $750 billion in Treasury securities and other assets in the United States should Congress pass the bill. Families of those who died on 9/11 called have called that blackmail.

“We have persisted for well over a decade in our effort to hold Saudi Arabia accountable for material support to the 9/11 conspiracy that we have extensively documented — notwithstanding two administrations’ persistence in maintaining the classification of evidence documented in the still-redacted portion of the Congressional Joint Inquiry Report, and the current administration’s refusal of FOIA (Freedom of Information Act) requests for other evidence seized in the raid that killed Osama Bin Laden and delay in the provision of routine documentation, such as copies of public trial exhibits, for over a year,” said lawyer Jerry Goldman, who represents 9/11 families in a class action suit against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!