ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

Early in the aftermoon of September 11, 2001, the threat of global terrorism was far from Tony Blair's mind.

He had been re-elected just three months before, and his speech to the annual Trades Union Congress provided the first post-summer platform for the Prime Minister to stamp his new agenda on the country.

Blair was still tinkering with his speech in his suite in Brighton's Grand Hotel.

The rest of his party busied themselves downstairs. A television flickered in the background.

Scroll down for more...

The picture cut away suddenly from Adam Boulton, the Sky News political editor, to images from the other side of the Atlantic.

At 8.46am Eastern Standard Time, 1.46pm British Summer Time, a plane had collided with the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York.

Anji Hunter, Blair's close aide and oldest friend, headed upstairs with the latest draft of his speech. Alastair Campbell, Blair's director of communications, also joined him.

Hunter passed on news of what was thought to be an accident.'Oh my God,' Blair said, almost absent-mindedly.

He turned to Campbell: "I'll have to refer to it at the beginning of my speech, won't I, Ali?"

Sky News was still talking about a tragic accident when, at 2.03pm British time, a second plane flew into the South Tower.

"What was that?" someone asked. "It's terrorism," stated a Special Branch detective bluntly.

Political secretary Robert Hill immediately went to tell Blair.

"At first he was slightly brusque with me as he wondered why he was being interrupted," Hill recalled.

"But when I explained what had happened he said very quickly, "I must speak to Alastair."

Blair wanted to get back to London as soon as possible. Special Branch insisted he travel by train - by car, the PM would be much more visible from the air.

Blair's party managed to catch the waiting 3.49pm to Victoria.

Cabinet Secretary Richard Wilson was being driven back to Whitehall after lunch when he heard news of the second plane.

Scroll down for more...

Almost immediately he received a call from Jeremy Heywood, Blair's principal private secretary, at No10.

"Should we be evacuating?" he asked.

"Where to?" said Wilson. "I'm not sure," Heywood replied.

"Well," said Wilson, the consummate mandarin, "I guess it's quite a good rule not to evacuate until one knows where one is planning to go to."

Although there was no hard information yet as to who was behind the attacks, "it was pretty clear even at that stage that it was Muslim fundamentalism", recalled Godric Smith, one of Blair's official spokesmen.

"I remember in particular discussing with the PM on the train the importance of avoiding a Muslim backlash."

But Blair's immediate worry was the Americans.

"Where's Bush?" one aide recalled him asking.

Scroll down for more...

"What worried him most was the uncertainty about where the President was and what exactly was happening."

At Victoria the Prime Minister was met by a police escort and whisked to Downing Street.

Blair headed to his small office adjoining the Cabinet Room, known as the "den".

Waiting for him were Britain's top intelligence officials: John Scarlett, chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC), and Stephen Lander, Director of MI5 (but also covering for MI6, whose director Richard Dearlove was away), as well as Blair's chief of staff Jonathan Powell and Wilson.

"Who's done this?" Blair demanded, looking straight at the "spooks" sprawled on the sofas.

"Well," replied Lander, "there are two possibilities. The most likely is Osama Bin Laden's organisation, though it could have been a Middle Eastern Islamist group because it was a suicide attack."

"Did I know about this?" Blair asked. There was an awkward silence. The spooks coughed a little.

"Well," Lander answered, "if you'd read the JIC material fully you would have come across some of this stuff."

"Fair enough," Blair replied. He asked Lander: "Are we at risk?"

"I don't think so, not at present."

Later Blair gave a public statement: "It is hard even to contemplate the utter carnage and terror which has engulfed so many innocent people...

Scroll down for more...

"For those that carried out these attacks, there are no adequate words of condemnation."

He ended with a precise proclamation of solidarity with America: "This is not a battle between the United States of America and terrorism, but between the free and democratic world and terrorism.

"We, therefore, here in Britain stand shoulder to shoulder with our American friends in this hour of tragedy, and we, like them, will not rest until this evil is driven from our world."

He had reached "a quite conscious decision to use the phrase 'stand shoulder to shoulder'," recalled official spokesman Tom Kelly.

"He wanted the Americans to know that they were not on their own."

Blair's staff had been calling the White House, but with little joy.

One senior Bush administration official based in the White House Situation Room that day recalled: "We were simply not in 'making calls mode'."

Unaware Bush had been told Washington was not safe for him and that he should stay airborne on Air Force One, Blair was troubled that Bush's priority appeared to be keeping out of danger, rather than returning to the centre to take command, which was always his own instinctive reaction.

"It's odd," Blair mused, "and it's not right."

He spent some time that evening learning more about Al Qaeda as papers from the JIC flowed in.

Huddled in the den with Hunter, Campbell and Powell, "he was in one of those moods when he was not articulating very much", said an insider.

With the immediate strain of the day passing, he became, for a while, "very emotional", although not tearful.

Blair remained deep in thought after his aides left.

"He knew straight away that it would be the defining issue for Bush, and thus probably for him too for the coming years," says John Sawers, a foreign affairs adviser to the PM.

"What Blair saw most clearly was the need for the inevitable response to 9/11 to be targeted against those responsible."

Iraq, which had been in his sights since 1998, crossed his mind, but the focus for now would be Afghanistan.

Iraq would be dealt with separately. In one day, Blair had found his calling on the world stage.

The following day Blair took a call from Bush at 12.30pm - to his relief he was the first foreign leader Bush called.

Blair underlined the importance of not acting precipitately or disproportionately.

Bush assured him: "I know what I've got to do...I don't just want to hit cruise missiles into the sand."

Blair followed the call by sending Bush a five-page memo, outlining his thoughts. ("His memo is a lot better than yours," Bush would tease his staff. "That's why I listen to him.")

Blair argued the Taliban regime should be given an ultimatum: hand over Bin Laden or face attack.

He also argued that restarting the Middle East peace process should be a priority.

Finally, he stressed the cancer was not confined to Afghanistan, nor indeed Al Qaeda.

They would have to act against all who financed or supported terrorism.

Unknown to Blair, the possibility of going after Iraq first was discussed by the Americans the weekend after 9/11.

Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld suggested here was "an opportunity" to attack Iraq.

However, most of Bush's advisers were then opposed to the idea and the Americans focused on Afghanistan. Blair pushed for an international coalition.

In the eight weeks after 9/11 he made 31 flights covering 40,000 miles and had 54 meetings with foreign leaders.

On Sunday, October 7, Blair received a call from Bush. The first air attacks in Afghanistan would begin that evening.

Bush issued a statement the next day saying the war in Afghanistan was merely the "first phase" of a war against terrorists.

The "sense being communicated by the US", Campbell wrote later, was "that they were constantly trying to link Iraq into the equation. TB was keen to pull it back".

The Afghanistan campaign was fought largely by Afghan resistance groups under the umbrella of the Northern Alliance.

It was essentially a surrogate war, "all about special forces, intelligence and suitcases of money", according to one insider.

By early November Blair was growing anxious over the course of the campaign.

His frustration boiled over in a "testy" note to Hoon: "Shouldn't it have been sorted out by now?"

While seasoned hands worried that too swift an advance on Kabul could lead to a bloodbath, Blair had no such qualms: "His judgment was that we were in a war, and the task in a war is to take the capital."

Kabul fell on November 13, bringing the Taliban's rule to an end.

Blair believed the coalition must provide troops for peacekeeping and reconstruction.

Washington took a different view. "Our desire was to do whatever minimal amount was necessary to avoid being seen as an occupying power," explained one senior Pentagon official, "and avoid contributing to a dependency by doing everything for them."

"US forces will not stay," Bush told a National Security Council meeting on November 13. "We don't do police work."

The Americans were "immensely allergic to the notion of either 'nation-building' or 'peacekeeping'," Christopher Meyer, British ambassador to the US, recalled.

"We had to come up with another phrase so we weren't mentioning those hideous terms."

Washington's attention now swung eastwards to Iraq. Eight days after the fall of Kabul, Bush secretly asked Rumsfeld to update invasion plans for Iraq.

2007 Anthony Seldon, Peter Snowdon and Daniel Collings.

Blair Unbound, by Anthony Seldon, Peter Snowdon and Daniel Collings, is published by Simon & Schuster on November 5, price £14.99.

To order your copy at £14.99 with free p&p, call The Review Bookstore on 0845 606 4213.