If you are currently enrolled in the WTC Health Program:

Certification is a two-step process.

First, your WTC Health Program doctor must confirm that the type of cancer you have is one of the cancers on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions. This means that the doctor will have to review your biopsy report and other medical records. The doctor must also find that exposure to airborne toxins, other hazards, or adverse conditions resulting from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks is substantially likely to be a significant factor in aggravating, contributing to, or causing your cancer. To do this the doctor must have the details of your WTC exposure and your subsequent medical history. If your doctor confirms that you do have one of the cancers on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions and that your exposure resulting from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks is substantially likely to be a significant factor in aggravating, contributing to, or causing your cancer, she or he will request certification of your cancer from the Administrator of the WTC Health Program. The Administrator then reviews all doctors’ requests for cancer certification. Your cancer will be certified for treatment coverage unless the Administrator finds that your cancer is not a cancer on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions or that your exposure resulting from the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks is not substantially likely to be a significant factor in aggravating, contributing to, or causing your cancer.

If you are not a member of the World Trade Center Health Program:

Please visit our website for information about the application process, www.cdc.gov/wtc. You can also contact the WTC Health Program at 1-888-982-4748 for information on how to apply.

If I have one of the cancers on the list, am I automatically eligible for treatment coverage in the WTC Health Program? No. The inclusion of your cancer on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions does not mean that your cancer will automatically be covered by the Program. Your Program doctor must also find that your WTC-related exposures caused, aggravated, or contributed to your cancer and request certification of your cancer from the WTC Program Administrator. If the Administrator certifies your cancer, then you are eligible for treatment coverage in the WTC Health Program.

When can a WTC Health Program member begin the process of certification of their cancer? The process of requesting certification for cancer may begin as of October 12, 2012. Members should contact their current Clinical Center of Excellence (CCE) to begin this process. If you do not know which CCE you are with, please contact our call center at 1-888-982-4748. If you are not yet enrolled, and believe you may be eligible for the Program, please visit the WTC Health Program website for information about the application process, www.cdc.gov/wtc or contact the WTC Health Program at 1-888-982-4748.

How long does certification take? It is not possible to provide a specific estimate for how long certification should take because each case is different. However, the WTC Program Administrator knows that certification decisions must be made as quickly as possible. Certification of a cancer and beginning treatment are two separate issues. Once your cancer has been certified by the WTC Program Administrator, you are eligible for treatment coverage for your cancer in the WTC Health Program. You and your doctor, however, must make decisions about when you should begin treatment based on your cancer and medical needs.

Will I be informed of the certification decision? Yes. You will be notified by either your CCE or the WTC Program Administrator. The details of how you will be notified are still being finalized. If your cancer is denied certification, then you will receive information about your appeal rights with the denial letter.

If my cancer is not certified, do I have a right to appeal? If you are denied certification, this means that your cancer treatment will not be paid for by the WTC Health Program. You have a right to appeal a denial. Information on how to appeal a denial will be included in the letter informing you of the WTC Program Administrator’s denial decision.

How soon after my cancer is certified will I actually expect to begin treatment? Certification of a cancer and beginning treatment are two separate issues. Once your cancer has been certified by the WTC Program Administrator, you are eligible for treatment coverage for your cancer in the WTC Health Program. You and your doctor, however, must make decisions about when you should begin treatment based on your cancer and medical needs.

If I have cancer and I am already seeing a doctor for my cancer care, can I still keep seeing my doctor?

In order for a WTC Health Program member to obtain coverage for treatment of any health condition on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions, including any type of cancer added to the List, the condition must first be certified by the WTC Program Administrator. All care for the WTC Health Program must be rendered by a provider affiliated with the WTC Health Program. If your current provider is affiliated with the WTC Health Program, then you will be able to continue seeing your doctor. If your current provider is not affiliated, ask the provider to contact your CCE to discuss becoming a WTC Health Program provider.

Will the WTC Health Program provide reimbursements to individuals for cancer treatment costs incurred before October 12, 2012?

No. The WTC Health Program will not reimburse members or healthcare providers for the costs of cancer treatments received before October 12, 2012. However, you might be able to receive compensation through the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund (VCF) for past cancer treatment costs. The VCF is administered by the Department of Justice, and enrollment in that program is separate from the WTC Health Program. For information regarding the VCF, please visit www.vcf.gov or call the VCF toll-free at 1-855-885-1555.

When can the WTC Health Program begin to provide reimbursements to individuals for cancer treatment costs incurred after October 12, 2012? Treatment costs can only be reimbursed for certified conditions, and for authorized services rendered by providers affiliated with the WTC Health Program. Once certified, costs can be reimbursed as of the date the condition is certified by the WTC Program Administrator. As of this time, a final decision has not been made whether to allow for any special authorizations to pay for treatment rendered before certification is finalized. As with any expansion of services, program specifics are still being decided and we will keep you informed of important changes as information becomes available.

If my cancer is certified by the WTC Health Program, are there any types of monetary caps or financial limits placed on the dollar amount of the care I’m entitled to?

No. There is no financial limit for the required treatment of your cancer if it has been certified by the WTC Program Administrator. However, the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act only provides funding for the WTC Health Program through 2016. At this time, we don’t know if additional funding will be made available for medical monitoring and treatment of cancer or any other illness on the List of WTC-Related Health Conditions after 2016.