Both the amounts raised and the speed at which they were donated put the Sept. 11 relief effort in a category unlike any previous outpouring of assistance. But the effort differed in other ways as well, especially in its emphasis on direct payments.

''There's no precedent for hundreds of thousands of dollars, much less millions, to go to individuals,'' said Marla Simpson, a section chief in the charities bureau of the New York attorney general. ''That's quite contrary to what's happened in the past, and what the tradition of charities is, which is service.''

Survivors of uniformed rescuers, about 400 of whom were killed in the attack on the World Trade Center, have received more than $365 million from the top six charities, according to the survey. When smaller charities are considered, the average is probably over a million dollars per victim, according to the survey. That is about seven times more per victim than was given on average to the survivors of the 2,600 civilian victims, who have received about $330 million from the top six charities. Another $457 million was sent to more than 30,000 whose homes or businesses that were affected.

Ms. Simpson noted that polls indicated that two-thirds of American households made donations after the attacks. That means, she said, ''by definition, most of the people who gave that money are worse off than many of the people who got it.''

Still, charity monitors say, it is an accurate reflection of donors' intent. ''We all wanted to do something to help and giving money was the easiest thing we could do, for most of us,'' said Victoria Bjorklund, a lawyer in New York who represents the Robin Hood Relief Fund. ''None of us could know who else was giving or how much or to whom.''

Ms. Simpson agreed that the focus on first responders matched the nation's reaction to the event. ''I don't think people who gave money around the country cared whether the first responders would get vastly more'' than and others who died, she said.

Beyond direct aid, numerous charities focused on specific areas in which they could provide services. ''We saw that early on, that foundations were saying, there are hidden needs, how are we connecting with those?'' said Loren Renz, the vice president for research at the Foundation Center, which has done a study on corporate and foundation giving that is to be released today at www.fdncenter.org/research/911/.

To look at the range of charitable responses, The Times contacted the 30 top charities ranked by amount of contribution, using a list provided by the Foundation Center. Twenty-nine responded, and a chart listing their complete answers can be found at www.nytimes.com/giving. Because many could not break down their spending in detail, and could not account for transfers of money between groups involved in the relief efforts, their figures were not included in the chart shown here.