(Port Authority of New York and New Jersey via Getty Images)

With the twists of a few final bolts, the steel spire atop One World Trade Center was installed Friday morning — raising the building’s height to a symbolic 1,776 feet.

A sea of construction workers stared into the blue spring sky with pride and delight after the finishing touches were applied about 8 a.m.

Ironworker Warren Smith, 49, said everyone involved understood the significance of the lower Manhattan milestone.

Construction workers installed the steel spire atop One World Trade Center Friday morning. (Mark Bonifacio/New York Daily News)

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO

“I was on Broadway, I saw the plane hit the building,” Smith said. “I’m one of the 9/11 workers ... It was a shame to see the towers go down, but now I feel good.

The 408-foot spire makes One World Trade Center the tallest building in the U.S. (Mark Bonifacio/New York Daily News)

“I have a sense of accomplishment seeing it go back up, and I’m a part of it.”

Co-worker Arban Nichols, 62, was left almost speechless as the spire — which had been held in place by a crane — was secured at the top of the new skyscraper.

The 408-foot spire will serve as a world-class broadcast antenna. An LED-powered light emanating from it will be seen from miles away. (Mark Lennihan/AP)

“I can’t really describe it,” said the East Flatbush ironworker. “It was like seeing America build itself back up again. I’ll be telling my grandchildren about it.”

The last part of the 18-piece spire was installed with little fanfare despite its importance to many. The 9/11 terrorist attacks killed 2,753 in the Twin Towers.

The final bolts were installed to secure the spire onto the building at 8 a.m. (Enid Alvarez/New York Daily News)

“It’s basically showing (the terrorists), ‘You can’t take America down. We’ll rebuild,’” said Eddie Fackler, who was meeting a friend downtown. “It’s a sense of who we are.”

The 408-foot, 758-ton spire will serve as a world-class broadcast antenna. An LED-powered light on the spire will be visible for miles, and a warning beacon was installed at its top.

Workers pose for a photo prior to raising the silver spire atop One World Trade Center early Friday. (Mark Lennihan)

“It's amazing,” said construction worker Lenny Bednare of Forest Hills, Queens. “It's an honor to be working here. It's just overwhelming."

The addition of the spire makes the $3.8 billion One World Trade Center, raised on the old 16-acre trade center site, the tallest structure in the U.S. and third-tallest in the world.

One World Trade Center in New York is reflected in the Hudson River as seen from Jersey City on Friday morning. The final piece of the building's spire was attached Friday. (GARY HERSHORN/REUTERS)

“I think we need it — as a city, as a nation,” said construction worker Mike Prender. “It's inspiring. It's good for America.”

The tower is slated to open for business in 2014.

A 408-foot spire is set into place at the top of One World Trade Center seen from the Heights neighborhood of Jersey City, N.J., on Friday. With the spire, the building rises at a symbolic 1,776 feet tall. (Enid Alvarez/New York Daily News)

Tenants include the magazine publisher Conde Nast, the government’s General Services Administration and Vantone Holdings China Center, which will provide business space for international companies.

“It's a great thing going forward and not allowing terrorists to keep us from doing what we need to do,” said Nerida Willson, a U.S. Postal Service employee who works opposite the tower.

“We need those towers. We are the greatest city on Earth.”

ebadia@nydailynews.com

***

One World Trade Center by the numbers:

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!