Chang W. Lee/The New York Times

Thousands of relatives of the 9/11 dead gathered in a park near ground zero on Saturday morning for the ninth annual reading of their names as a nation debated whether a mosque and Islamic community center should be built near ground zero and a president pleaded for religious tolerance.

They filled a makeshift plaza in Zuccotti Park, beside a construction site sprouting cranes and American flags where 4 World Trade Center is rising, carrying cups of coffee and bouquets of flowers, wearing the sweatshirts and T-shirts and ball caps of the Port Authority police, the New York State emergency medical technicians, the New York Fire and Police Departments and many other agencies.

And on another crystal-clear September morn, a few degrees cooler than the one engraved on a city’s heart, they held aloft posters and photos of the departed whose captions told the story of that day and of this one.

Angel Luis Jarbe Jr.: “Always in our hearts.” Lt. Philip S. Petti, FDNY: “Remembering.”

James V. DeBlase Jr.: “Where are OUR rights?” Joon Koo Kang: “We love you!! Islam mosque ‘right next to ground zero??? We should stop this!!”

From the stage, however, the ceremony kept strictly to remembrance and steered clear of politics.

“No other public tragedy has cut our city so deeply,” Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said moments before a firefighter rang a silver bell at 8:47 a.m., signaling the moment the first plane hit the first tower.

“No other place is as filled with our compassion, our love and our solidarity,” Mr. Bloomberg said. “It is with the strength of these emotions, as well as the concrete, glass and steel that is brought in day by day, that we will build on the footprints of the past the foundation of the future.”

Chang W. Lee/The New York Times

After the mayor spoke, pairs of readers, some poised, some tearful, took turns reading a dozen or so names apiece – one reader was a victim’s son or daughter or widow, the other an iron worker or architect or electrician on the mammoth project to rebuild the area.

Periodically, other politicians ascended the stage and offered brief readings. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey read Langston Hughes’s eight-line poem “Dreams.” Former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani recited the conclusion of Tennyson’s “Ulysses”: “To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.”

The vice president, Joseph R. Biden Jr., read from a poem by Longfellow called “The Builders.”: “Make the house, where Gods may dwell / Beautiful, entire, and clean. / Else our lives are incomplete.”

The actor Kristin Chenoweth belted out “Borrowed Angels,” a song for the fallen.

But mostly, the morning belonged to the victims and the simple litany of their names – 2,752 were read aloud, flowing unstoppably from the mouths of those who mourned them yet.

An older woman burst into tears as she finished her reading. “Let today never ever be a national holiday. Let it be forever somber.”

Nearby, weeping women in funeral dress and sunglasses, men in uniform and children in T-shirts emblazoned with photographs of smiling faces dropped roses, one for each name, into a circular pool of water until the sharp blue sky reflected in it was blotted out by a carpet of bloom.

At 9:03, the bell was rung again to signal the moment the plane struck the south tower. In the silence that followed, a sparrow twittered. The muffled roar of traffic reached the plaza. Police officers on the roof of the building across the street scanned the skies with binoculars.

Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times

Before the ceremony began, even amid the hugs and tears, the divisions were apparent.

Around 7:25 a.m., as a choir finished “The Star-Spangled Banner” and families trickled in to the plaza, a blond woman faced the media riser and held up a photograph of a woman with short brown hair.

“Today is ONLY about my sister and the other innocents killed nine years ago,” read the text beside the photo.

As the cameras snapped, the woman began to cry. An older man came over and gave her a hug. She said something about the impossibility of closure, and he told her, “I know exactly how you feel.”

Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times

As it turned out, the woman’s sister was a flight attendant on American Airlines Flight 11, which crashed into the north tower, where the man’s wife and niece were working.

Then the woman, Alyson Low, 39, a children’s librarian in Fayetteville, Ark., explained what she meant by her sign.

“I’m tired of talking about everything else, tired of the politics,” she said. “Today is only about loss.”

For the man, Nick Chiarchiaro, it wasn’t.

After he told the story of his last morning with his wife before she went off to work at Fred Alger Management on 93rd floor of the north tower, Mr. Chiarchiaro, 67, a designer of fire alarm systems, segued into the other topic of the day.

“A mosque is built on the site of a winning battle,” Mr. Chiarchiaro said. “They are symbols of conquest. Hence we have a symbol of conquest here? I don’t think so.”

Hours later, after the sun had cleared the skyline and flooded the plaza, the reciting of the names continued. Each bereaved reader finished his or her list with the name of the loved one lost. A boy named Joseph Scparta read out his complement and concluded, “and my uncle, Firefighter Leonard Ragaglia.”

A man named Roman Gertsberg read out the name of his daughter, Marina Gertsberg. “May God bless you,” he said.

After Geraldine Halderman made it through her list, her voice thickened for the final name.

“And my son, my hero, Fire Lieut. David Halderman,” she said, bursting into tears. “I love you forever, Dave. Watch over us.”

Just after noon, the last name was read, and the Young People’s Chorus of New York City trooped onstage in sashes of blue and orange and yellow and purple and red, and performed “Keep Me In Your Heart” to a plaza that had already mostly emptied.

The mayor spoke again. A trumpeter faced ground zero and began to blow taps. A second trumpeter joined him in a round, and then a third – three men from the New York Police Department, the Fire Department and the Port Authority police, their clarion calls rising to the sky.

Then the firefighter at the silver bell struck it one more time and departed, and the last of the families filed out into the brightness of midday.