A Winnipeg woman whose partner was killed in the 9/11 terror attacks is heading to New York this weekend to mark the 10th anniversary of the tragedy.

Ellen Judd lost her partner, Christine Egan, in one of the Twin Towers of New York's World Trade Center when they were destroyed on Sept. 11, 2001.

The 9/11 memorial is two square pools located where the Twin Towers formerly stood and inscribed with the names of those who died in the terror attacks. ((www.911memorial.org))

Egan's brother, Michael, worked on the 105th floor of the south tower, which was struck by a hijacked jumbo jet at 9:03 a.m. ET. The north tower was hit by a plane at 8:46 a.m.

Within two hours, both towers collapsed.

Judd said the tragedy is always on her mind, but believes this year will be especially moving because of the official unveiling of a special museum and memorial at Ground Zero, inscribed with the names of those who lost their lives.

"It feels more personal and touching to me than some of the previous years," she said.

"In New York, they're always very good about honouring every single person that was lost that day."

Judd said Egan would be pleased about a scholarship that was established in her name to help nursing students in Canada's north.

So far, 21 scholarships have been handed out to 17 recipients who have been able to complete their studies and work in places such as Nunavut.

Egan, who was passionate about nursing in the north, worked in Winnipeg for Health Canada as a nurse epidemiologist.

The 9/11 tragedy was the result of four coordinated suicide attacks against targets in New York and Washington, D.C., when members of al-Qaeda hijacked four passenger jets.

After the Twin Towers were hit, the hijackers crashed a third plane into the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia.

A fourth plane crashed into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania, when passengers attempted to wrest control from the terrorists. The passengers' action prevented the plane from reaching its intended target in Washington, D.C.

A total of 2,996 people died: 19 hijackers and 2,977 victims.

Twenty-four Canadians were killed. There were 19 men and five women.

The youngest was 30 years old, the oldest was 70.