The document does not provide any details from Mr. Mohammed's questioning about why other proposed Sept. 11 targets were dropped.

The analysis does not refer to Mr. Mohammed by name, only to continuing debriefings of a ''senior'' Qaeda official who was recently captured overseas, but officials said the document refers to Mr. Mohammed. Mr. Mohammed was captured in Pakistan on March 1 and is in United States custody. The government has not disclosed where he is being detained and questioned.

Most counterterrorism officials had believed that Mr. bin Laden was not actively involved in the details and execution of the Sept. 11 attacks or other terrorist operations, but rather that he gave the ''green light'' for operations and left the actual planning to people like Mr. Mohammed and Ayman al-Zawahiri, the second-ranking leader in Al Qaeda. Like Mr. bin Laden, the Egyptian-born Mr. Zawahiri is still at large.

If it were shown that Mr. bin Laden had in fact personally identified sites for the hijackers, that could prompt counterterrorism officials to rethink their assessment of how Al Qaeda works and how it chooses its targets, officials acknowledged.

With war in Iraq imminent, officials have been girding for the possibility of reprisal attacks and are eager to identify possible targets.

''The reality is that we don't know for sure what bin Laden's role was in the attacks,'' said a senior law enforcement official who spoke on the condition that he not be named.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Some counterterrorism officials are skeptical of much of what Mr. Mohammed has said. Other senior leaders of Al Qaeda who were captured after the United States invasion in Afghanistan in 2001 have given American authorities information that led to government warnings about possible attacks but that ultimately was thought to be bogus.

''He may be deliberately trying to deceive us or withholding information,'' one official said. ''This is a guy who is well-trained in counterinterrogation techniques.''

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A senior intelligence official said that when dealing with captured terrorist leaders such as Mr. Mohammed, interrogators are always wary that the prisoner ''may be seeking to influence as much as to inform.''

While officials are proceeding cautiously in evaluating his statements, there have been other episodes even before the Sept. 11 attacks that seem to bolster Mr. Mohammed's account.

In a court case in Manhattan in 2000 linked to the East African bombings, a former United States Army sergeant who pleaded guilty in the attacks said that he brought diagrams and pictures of the American embassy in Nairobi to Qaeda leaders in Sudan before the bombing there and that the material was ''reviewed by Osama bin Laden.''

The defendant, Ali Mohamed, told a federal judge at the time of his guilty plea in the case that ''bin Laden looked at the picture of the American Embassy and pointed to where a truck could go as a suicide bomber.''

Mr. bin Laden, in a videotape broadcast last September by Al-Jazeera, praised the hijackers and boasted of his advance knowledge of the Sept. 11 attacks, saying that he had even tried to predict the number of casualties. But he gave no indication that he had picked the targets or had met with Mr. Atta to discuss the execution of the plan, as Mr. Mohammed now contends.

Officials emphasized that Mr. Mohammed had not provided interrogators with any information regarding current Qaeda operations.

Before Sept. 11, Al Qaeda had also considered attacking ''unidentified bridges in New York City, St. Louis, San Diego and either San Francisco or San Mateo,'' the analysis said that Mr. Mohammed has told interrogators. In addition to gas stations in New York City, Al Qaeda had also looked at water reservoirs, he said.

In addition, Mr. Mohammed told interrogators that Jose Padilla, arrested last year in Chicago on suspicion of trying to build a ''dirty bomb,'' discussed attacking an unknown building on the United States-Mexico border, with Texas the most likely target, officials said.