In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful



Dr. Yahia Abdur-Rahman, from the Islamic Shurah Council of Southern California (ISCSC), offers

, from the Islamic Shurah Council of Southern California (ISCSC), offers Supplication For The Victims Dr. Maher Hathout

, from the the Muslim Public Affairs Council (MPAC) and The Islamic Center of Southern California (ICSC), condemns the attack and issues a statement. Click here to listen Dr. Ahmad Sakr, from the Islamic Education Center (IEC), offers his condolences to the families of the victims and condemns the attack. Click

, from the Islamic Education Center (IEC), offers his condolences to the families of the victims and condemns the attack. Click here to listen Dr. Muzammil Siddiqi, former president of the Islamic Society of North America (ISNA), condemns the attack. Click

, former president of the Islamic Society of North America (ISNA), condemns the attack. Click here to listen

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE - 9/11/01

U.S. MUSLIMS CONDEMN TERRORIST ATTACKS

(WASHINGTON, DC - 9/11/2001) - The American Muslim Political Coordination Council (AMPCC), today condemned the apparent terrorist attacks in New York and Washington and offered condolences to the families of those who were killed or injured.

The AMPCC statement read in part:

"American Muslims utterly condemn what are apparently vicious and cowardly acts of terrorism against innocent civilians. We join with all Americans in calling for the swift apprehension and punishment of the perpetrators. No political cause could ever be assisted by such immoral acts."

Leaders of the American Muslim Political Coordination Council (AMPCC) held a meeting in Washington, DC, on Tuesday, September 11, 2001, to issue the following points related to the terrorist attacks:

1) We assert unequivocal condemnation based on our religious values and our identity as American Muslims; 2) We do not need to defend every maniacal incident emanating from the Muslim world or the Muslim community, just as other religious groups need not defend their extremists; 3) We offer compassion to the victims and solidarity with all Americans in the face of danger; 4) Notwithstanding the disbelief that anyone following the faith of Islam could commit such a heinous crime, we condemn the act regardless of the identity of the perpetrators; 5) We deplore the irresponsible reporting that twists the realities and complexities of the Muslim world in order to project only anti-American sentiment during this disturbing period when we are all attempting to move beyond the state of mourning for the national tragedy; 6) We warn against opportunists who will exploit the misery and hysteria of the public in order to promote a political agenda aimed at tarnishing the name of Islam and Muslims; 7) We should not diminish our resolve to be active in protecting the civil liberties of all Americans and struggling for justice both locally and globally; 8) We need to organize activities to help the victims medically, psychologically and in every other way we can.

American Muslim Alliance (AMA) Condemns Terrorist Attack



(Newark, California: 9/11/01) The American Muslim Alliance, a national civic education organization, condemned today's terrorist attacks in New York and Washington in the "strongest terms".

Dr. Agha Saeed, the national Chair of the American Muslim Alliance, Stated:

"These attacks are against both divine and human laws and we condemn them in the strongest terms. The Muslim Americans join the nation in calling for swift apprehension and stiff punishment of the perpetrators, and offer our sympathies to the victims and their families."

Contact:Ph:(510) 872 - 8013 E-mail: [email protected]

AMC Deplores The Attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon

(WASHINGTON, DC - 9/11/2001) The American Muslim Council (AMC) strongly condemns this morning's plane attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and expresses deep sorrow for Americans that were injured and killed. AMC sends out its condolence to all victims of this cowardly terrorist attack. There is no cause that justifies this type of an immoral and inhumane act that has affected so many innocent American lives. AMC supports all efforts of the investigation in order to track down the people responsible for this tragic act of terrorism.

The American Muslim Political Coordination Council (AMPCC) issued a statement which reads:

"American Muslims utterly condemn what are apparently vicious and cowardly acts of terrorism against innocent civilians. We join with all Americans in calling for the swift apprehension and punishment of the perpetrators. No Political cause could ever be assisted by such immoral acts."

The AMPCC consists of AMC, Council on American-Islamic Relations, American Muslim Alliance and Muslim Public Affairs Council.

Donate Blood To Help The Innocent Victims

(WASHINGTON, DC - 9/11/2001) The American Muslim Council calls upon the members of the Muslim community to come together at this tragic time where so many of our fellow Americans have been killed and injured. This American tragedy affects all of us and we should do whatever we can do help save lives of the injured victims. AMC encourages Islamic Centers to start blood drive campaigns and encourages everyone to visit hospitals and medical centers in the capitol and New York City to donate much needed blood to those who are required to receive immediate medical assistance.

AMC Seeks Assistance From Law Enforcement Agencies To Protect All Americans

(WASHINGTON, DC - 9/11/2001) The American Muslim Council (AMC) is urging all Muslims to come together in this time of tragedy. AMC today condemned the cowardly terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington and expressed its condolences to the families of innocent people killed. This horrific violent incident disturbs American Muslims.

Advertisement

AMC wants all law enforcement officials to be cognizant of the fact that at times like these, there are some acts of violence perpetrated against Islamic Centers and Muslims of our communities. We are confident that authorities will protect all men, women and children. We hope to prevent the acts of violence directed towards Muslims and Islamic Centers. American Muslims experienced violent attacks and verbal harassment in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City Bombing when our fellow citizens rushed to judgment about the perpetrators of the crime. We urge our fellow Americans not to be quick to stereotype Muslims, who are also suffering at this traumatic time. We, like all Americans, want to feel secure and want to see the perpetrators brought to justice. Enough innocent lives have been killed today.

Contact: Farkhunda Ali, Communications Director

(202) 789-2262 ext. 205, [email protected]



American Muslims for Jerusalem Condemns the Terrorist Attacks

(Washington, DC 9/11/01) - Joining the Muslim community around the country, the Washington based American Muslims for Jerusalem (AMJ) is appalled and strongly condemns the terrorist attacks in New York, Washington, and other parts of the country. AMJ sends out its deepest condolences to the families of the victims of these cowardly attacks.

As Muslims we utterly deplore these heinous and barbaric acts and hope for the quick apprehension and swift applications of justice. We also urge the media to exercise restraint, act responsibly when reporting, and not rush to judgment. Until the perpetrators are identified and brought to justice, all media reports should be accurate, restraint, and sensitive.

AMJ calls on Muslims nationwide to offer every assistance they can to help the victims of today's terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C. Muslims in local communities should take the following IMMEDIATE ACTIONS:

* Muslim medical professionals are asked to go to the scenes of the attacks to offer aid and comfort to the victims.

* Muslim relief agencies should contact their counterparts to offer support in the recovery efforts.

* Individual Muslims should donate blood by contacting the local office of the Red Cross. (Call 1-800-GIVE-LIFE.) They should also send donations to those relief agencies that are on the scene of the attacks.

American Muslims for Jerusalem

Tel (202)548-4200, Fax (202)548-4201

MUSLIMS ASKED TO OFFER HELP FOR VICTIMS OF TERRORIST ATTACKS

(WASHINGTON, DC - 9/11/2001) - The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) is calling on Muslims nationwide to offer whatever assistance they can to help the victims of today's terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C.

Muslims in local communities should take the following IMMEDIATE ACTIONS:

* Muslim medical professionals are asked to go to the scenes of the attacks to offer aid and comfort to the victims.

* Muslim relief agencies should contact their counterparts to offer support in the recovery efforts.

* Individual Muslims should donate blood by contacting the local office of the Red Cross. (Call 1-800-GIVE-LIFE.) They should also send donations to those relief agencies that are on the scene of the attacks.

MUSLIMS OFFER HELP FOR VICTIMS OF TERRORIST ATTACKS

(WASHINGTON, DC - 9/11/2001) - The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), a prominent Washington-based Islamic advocacy group, is calling on Muslims nationwide to offer whatever assistance they can to help the victims of today's terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C.

In an alert to the American Muslim community, CAIR suggested that the following actions be taken:

Muslim medical professionals are asked to go to the scenes of the attacks to offer aid and comfort to the victims.



Muslim relief agencies should contact their counterparts to offer support in the recovery efforts.



Individual Muslims should donate blood by contacting the local office of the Red Cross. (Call 1-800-GIVE-LIFE.) They should also send donations to those relief agencies that are on the scene of the attacks.

CAIR's alert asked community members to report incidents of anti-Muslim harassment or attacks. It also suggested steps to take to increase security around mosques and Islamic centers. (In the first few days following the 1995 attack on the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma, Muslims reported more than 200 incidents of harassment, threats and actual violence. CAIR has already received reports of harassment and attacks against Muslims who wear Islamic attire.)

Security precautions suggested by CAIR's alert include:

Those who wear Islamic attire should consider staying out of public areas for the immediate future.



Request additional police patrols in the vicinity of mosques.



Post mosque members at entrances and parking areas during prayer times.



Report suspicious packages to police.



Document descriptions of suspicious people or vehicles.

There are an estimated seven million Muslims in America and some 1.2 billion worldwide. Islam is one of the fastest growing religions in this country and around the world.

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

ISNA CONDEMNS TERRORIST ATTACKS

(Plainfield, IN - 9/11/2001) - The Islamic Society of North America (ISNA) joins Muslim Americans and all Americans in expressing its deep sorrow over the apparently deliberate air-crashes in New York and Washington, DC that have led to the loss of countless innocent lives.

ISNA joins Muslim organizations throughout North America in condemning theses apparent terrorist attacks and calls upon Muslim Americans to come forward with their skills and resources to help alleviate the sufferings of the affected people and their families.

ISNA condemns these apparently senseless acts of terrorism against innocent civilians, which will only be counterproductive to any agenda the perpetrators may have had in mind. No political cause could ever be assisted by such immoral acts.

We join with all Americans in calling for the swift apprehension and punishment of the perpetrators, and call upon our justice system to maintain strict standards of justice and fairness in these trying times.

We also urge the media to exercise restraint, and to act responsibly when reporting on these terrorist attacks. Until the perpetrators are brought to justice, all media reports should be accurate, restrained and sensitive. Let us pray to God that He may Guide us all to keep firm in following our principles and offer relief to the victims of violence wherever they may be.

- END -

CONTACT: Dr. Sayyid M. Syeed, Secretary General of ISNA

TEL: 317-839-8157 ext 222 Email: [email protected]

Signatories:

American Muslim Alliance, American Muslim Council, Association of Muslim Scientists and Engineers, Association of Muslim Social Scientists, Council on American-Islamic Relations, Islamic Medical Association of North America, Islamic Circle of North America, Islamic Society of North America, Ministry of Imam W. Deen Mohammed, Muslim American Society, Muslim Public Affairs Council

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE - 9/11/01

The Islamic Circle of North America (ICNA), condemns in the strongest possible way the heinous and horrific acts of terrorism that occurred in New York City and Washington, D.C.,

this morning.

The American Muslim community is united in its support to the law enforcement agencies in bringing the culprits to justice. We join our fellow citizens in this moment of grief and sorrow.

We urge all to donate blood for the victims at their local blood centers. Our hearts are with those who have lost loved ones in this terrible tragedy and our prayers are with the departed souls.

URGENT APPEAL, PLEASE HELP, WE NEED MEDICAL PROFESSIONALS AND NURSES VOLUNTEER TO PROVIDE HELP FOR THE VICTIMS IN NYC

ICNA RELIEF WILL PROVIDE FOOD AND RESIDENCE, PLEASE DONATE BLOOD FOR THE VICTIMS

CONTACT US AT 718 658 7028, ICNA Relief, 166-26 89th Ave., Jamaica, NY 11432

For Immediate Release

September 11, 2001

AMERICAN MUSLIMS CONDEMN TERRORIST ATTACKS

Islamic Shura (Consultative) Council of Southern California (ISCSC) on the behalf of all Masajid (Mosques) and Muslim community in Southern California joining Muslims around the country to condemns the latest cowardly acts of terrorism against innocent civilians.

We join with all our fellow Americans in calling for the swift apprehension and punishment of the perpetrators. No cause could ever be assisted by such immoral acts."

We offer our sincere and heartfelt condolences to the families of the

victims of those who were killed or injured. We pray to God, the Cherisher of all people to bestow His mercy upon all & help us in patience to overcome this catastrophe. We pray that those who love God will take this opportunity to put their hands together to bring the values of love, decency, fairness and Justice back into our lives.

We also urge the media to exercise restraint, and to act responsibly when reporting on these terrorist attacks. Until the perpetrators are brought to justice, all media reports should be accurate, restrained and sensitive.

The Islamic Shura Council is inviting all religious leaders of all faiths to a prayer meeting at the City of Pasadena Auditorium at 11:00 am on East Green Street. Many religious leaders of all faiths have already accepted to participate.

God Bless America.

Contact: Dr. Yahia Abdul Rahman, Chairman of ISCSC at: (626) 255-2181

PRESS RELEASE: MUSLIM THINK TANK CONDEMNS APPARENT TERRORIST ATTACKS

Minaret of Freedom Institute

4323 Rosedale Avenue, Bethesda, MD 20814

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE!!!!

Contact: Imad-ad-Dean Ahmad, Ph.D.

301-907-0947

MUSLIM THINK TANK CONDEMNS APPARENT TERRORIST ATTACKS ASKS MUSLIMS TO DONATE BLOOD AND MONEY TO AID VICTIMS AND FAMILIES

Bethesda, MD (September 11, 2001). The Minaret of Freedom Institute, a Washington, DC area Islamic policy research institute today condemned the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Imad-ad-Dean Ahmad, President of the organization, denounced the attacks and expressed condolences for the victims and their families. "For American Muslims the unprecedented coordinated attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon is a triple tragedy," Ahmad said. "As Americans, our country is under attack. As Muslims, the tragedy of attacks on noncombatants is anathema to us. Finally, as the 'usual suspects' in a situation of this type we must be concerned with a new acceleration of persecution against us and our families."

Ahmad noted that a number of Muslim organizations have already stepped forward to serve as good neighbors. Both the Islamic-American Zakat Foundation, a Bethesda, Maryland charitable organization and the American Muslim Foundation in Alexandria, Virginia NGO are organizing blood drives to help out with the crisis caused by the violence. Ahmad also acknowledged the care being given by local law enforcement agencies to protect all citizens from violent acts that might be sparked by frustration over this morning's attacks. In particular he noted special efforts by the Montgomery County police in Maryland to contact Muslim organizations. Ahmad expressed concern that amid recent vilification of the American Muslim community by commentators Daniel Pipes and Steven Emerson, the FBI has recently devoted resources to shutting down Islamic web sites when such resources might have been better allocated to protect against problems like today's attacks. "I hope the authorities will be able to identify the planners and perpetrators of these crimes and bring them to justice," Ahmad said.

The Minaret of Freedom Institute (MFI), located in the Washington, DC area, is dedicated to research and educational efforts regarding Islamic law and Muslim history. MFI summarizes its purposes as: to "counter distortions and misconceptions about Islamic law and practice; demonstrate the Islamic origins of [certain] modern values ...; expose both American and Islamic world Muslims to free market thought; [and] advance the status of Muslim peoples maligned by a hostile environment in the West and oppressed by repressive political regimes in the East." Dr. Imad-ad-Dean Ahmad is co-editor with Ahmed Yousef of Islam and the West: A Dialog.

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE - 9/11/01

SHARI'A SCHOLARS ASSOCIATION OF NORTH AMERICA (SSANA) CONDEMNS TERRORIST ATTACKS

(Detroit, MI - 9/11/2001) The Shari'a Scholars Association of North America (SSANA) strongly condemn this morning's plane attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and expresses its deep sorrow for Americans that were injured and killed. SSANA send out its condolence to all victims of this cowardly terrorist attack. There is no cause that justifies this type of an immoral and inhumane act that has affected so many innocent Amercian lives. SSANA supports all efforts to investigate and immediately capture the evil persons responsible for these immoral can cowardly acts. Certainly, there is no justification for these acts from either an Islamic perspective or, in truth, from the perspective of any other moral and freedom-loving people. These acts diminish the freedom of all Americans, including American Muslims. Our condolence go out to all of the victims of these inhumane acts. 9/11



Related posts from similar topics:



Yemen's Crisis Belongs to All of Us

What’s the UN doing to Stopping Genocide of the Rohingyas of Myanmar?

Interview: Imran Hosein at the U.N. Geneva

Saudi's 'War on Lebanon' Backfires

U.N.: Saudi Blockade Threatens to Starve Millions in Yemen

Saudi Arabia Blames Iran for Missile Attack

Syria and Iraq: Self-Proclaimed "Caliphate" Witnessing its Last Days

I am in rage when people demean Islam

Yemen: Facing War, Famine and Pestilence

Yemen: People Volunteer to Fight Cholera Epidemic

Iraqi Army Takes ‘Full Control’ of Kirkuk

More than 260 000 Afghan Civilians Lost Homes