Manhattan News Manhattan News More>>

May 21-27 Fleet Week 2014 Fleet Week 2014 After a hiatus last year caused by the federal budget sequestration, Fleet Week New York is back for 2014. The U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard are coming to town from May 21 through May 27. Locals and tourists will have a chance to tour Navy and Coast Guard vessels and meet sailors, Marines, and coasties. Many service men and women from those ships also get some much-needed shore leave and will explore New York, many for the first time. After a hiatus last year caused by the federal budget sequestration, Fleet Week New York is back for 2014. The U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard are coming to town from May 21 through May 27. Locals and tourists will have a chance to tour Navy and Coast Guard vessels and meet sailors, Marines, and coasties. Many service men and women from those ships also get some much-needed shore leave and will explore New York, many for the first time.

Rabbi, Boy Scout leader among dozens arrested in child porn case Rabbi, Boy Scout leader among dozens arrested in child porn case Federal authorities have charged at least 70 men and one woman in the New York City area as part of a child porn investigation. The five-week operation has targeted people who use computer file-sharing programs to exchange videos and photos of children having sex. Authorities say the defendants include a police officer, a paramedic, a rabbi and a Boy Scout leader. Federal authorities have charged at least 70 men and one woman in the New York City area as part of a child porn investigation. The five-week operation has targeted people who use computer file-sharing programs to exchange videos and photos of children having sex. Authorities say the defendants include a police officer, a paramedic, a rabbi and a Boy Scout leader.

National September 11 Memorial Museum opens National September 11 Memorial Museum opens The steel and glass museum in lower Manhattan known as the National September 11 Memorial Museum opens to the public on Wednesday. It holds heart-wrenching artifacts, including mangled World Trade Center steel and personal mementos from the tragic day. Admission to the museum is $24 for adults. Tickets were sold out for the opening. Families of 9/11 victims and 9/11 rescue and recovery workers have free access. The steel and glass museum in lower Manhattan known as the National September 11 Memorial Museum opens to the public on Wednesday. It holds heart-wrenching artifacts, including mangled World Trade Center steel and personal mementos from the tragic day. Admission to the museum is $24 for adults. Tickets were sold out for the opening. Families of 9/11 victims and 9/11 rescue and recovery workers have free access.

Parents of children with autism face challenges getting services Parents of children with autism face challenges getting services Since Avonte Oquendo's tragic disappearance last fall in Queens, several more children with autism have gone missing in the city. So what do parents have to do to keep their kids safe in school and how do they go about it? If parents want an aide, also called a para-professional, it can be a difficult process. Some say it's a battle. Since Avonte Oquendo's tragic disappearance last fall in Queens, several more children with autism have gone missing in the city. So what do parents have to do to keep their kids safe in school and how do they go about it? If parents want an aide, also called a para-professional, it can be a difficult process. Some say it's a battle.

Text-to-911 not coming to NYC anytime soon Text-to-911 not coming to NYC anytime soon When it comes to an emergency, we're taught to dial 911 from the time we can walk. But now in more and more places you can text to get help. Emergency responders in 16 states are currently using the technology. In New York, you can text 911 in several cities upstate. But not in New York City. As of this month, all four major cellphone companies -- Sprint, Verizon Wireless, T-Mobile and ATT -- are able to transmit 911 texts to local governments that want to and are able to receive them. When it comes to an emergency, we're taught to dial 911 from the time we can walk. But now in more and more places you can text to get help. Emergency responders in 16 states are currently using the technology. In New York, you can text 911 in several cities upstate. But not in New York City. As of this month, all four major cellphone companies -- Sprint, Verizon Wireless, T-Mobile and ATT -- are able to transmit 911 texts to local governments that want to and are able to receive them.

MTA may delay replacing MetroCard system MTA may delay replacing MetroCard system The 20-year-old MTA MetroCard system is near the end of its useful life, according to several of the transit authority's past chairmen. But the MTA has indicated it may keep the MetroCard until 2020 as it phases in a new system. A MTA spokesman said in part: "We have an aggressive schedule for a new fare payment system in place... We have also taken preliminary steps to... take the MetroCard system out to 2023." The 20-year-old MTA MetroCard system is near the end of its useful life, according to several of the transit authority's past chairmen. But the MTA has indicated it may keep the MetroCard until 2020 as it phases in a new system. A MTA spokesman said in part: "We have an aggressive schedule for a new fare payment system in place... We have also taken preliminary steps to... take the MetroCard system out to 2023."

The Big Idea 3D printing revolutionizing medicine and more 3D printing revolutionizing medicine and more Imagine it. Design it. Hold it in your hands. Technology first introduced in the 1980s is now open to a whole new market with 3D printers regularly available for less than $2,000. It's creating a wave of innovation and new competition among entrepreneurs like Jerry Castanos. He just opened 3D Heights, a full-service printing lab in Washington Heights. Among his top clients are med students at nearby Columbia University. Imagine it. Design it. Hold it in your hands. Technology first introduced in the 1980s is now open to a whole new market with 3D printers regularly available for less than $2,000. It's creating a wave of innovation and new competition among entrepreneurs like Jerry Castanos. He just opened 3D Heights, a full-service printing lab in Washington Heights. Among his top clients are med students at nearby Columbia University.

Skimmer found on ticket machine at Grand Central Skimmer found on ticket machine at Grand Central Metro-North ticket kiosks are supposed to make it faster and easier for commuters at Grand Central Terminal to buy a ticket. Unfortunately, the MTA says the machines are also appealing to thieves. A Queens man was arrested for installing a skimming device on a ticket machine at Grand Central. Metro-North ticket kiosks are supposed to make it faster and easier for commuters at Grand Central Terminal to buy a ticket. Unfortunately, the MTA says the machines are also appealing to thieves. A Queens man was arrested for installing a skimming device on a ticket machine at Grand Central.

Phasing out MetroCard could take longer Phasing out MetroCard could take longer New York subway and bus riders may be swiping their MetroCards beyond 2020. The MTA had previously said that the current system could not be maintained in good repair beyond 2019 without more spending. The agency reportedly now says it can maintain the system until 2020 based on its current budget. New York subway and bus riders may be swiping their MetroCards beyond 2020. The MTA had previously said that the current system could not be maintained in good repair beyond 2019 without more spending. The agency reportedly now says it can maintain the system until 2020 based on its current budget.