Baltimore police have suspended six officers after the death of a man who was injured while in police custody.

Freddie Gray, 25, was critically injured after his arrest April 12. He died early Sunday morning at Shock Trauma. According to the family's lawyer, Gray suffered a severe spinal cord injury.

Advertisement

More: Gray family attorney speaks out

This has become a national story, another case in which an encounter with police has led to a death, raising questions about police conduct.

"We are a community on the edge right now," Baltimore Police Commissioner Anthony Batts said during a news conference Monday afternoon.

Baltimore City police have since suspended six officers involved. That includes the three initial officers on bicycle, the driver of the transport van and two other officers.

"Our community is experiencing a great deal of trauma," Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake said during a news conference Monday afternoon. "This is a tense time for Baltimore. I'm angry that we are here again, that we have to tell another mother that her child is dead."

Baltimore police identified the officers involved as follows:

- Lt. Brian Rice, 41, has been a member of the Baltimore Police Department since 1997

- Sgt. Alicia White, 30, has been a member of the Baltimore Police Department since 2010

- Police Officer William Porter, 25, has been a member of the Baltimore Police Department since 2012

- Police Officer Garrett Miller, 26, has been a member of the Baltimore Police Department since 2012

- Police Officer Edward Nero, 29, has been a member of the Baltimore Police Department since 2012

- Police Officer Caesar Goodson, 45, has been a member of the Baltimore Police Department since 1999

Why did officers pursue Gray?

According to a police charging document obtained by the WBAL-TV 11 News I-Team on Monday, officers arrested Gray on a west Baltimore street because he "fled unprovoked upon noting police presence in the neighborhood."

"The officers made eye contact, he ran, and the officers pursued," Batts said.

Officers chased Gray down the street and caught him.

"The officer then noticed a knife clipped to the inside of his pants pocket. The defendant was arrested without force or incident," according to the charging document.

"We know that having a knife is not necessarily a crime, it is not necessarily probable cause to chase someone," Rawlings-Blake said.

The officer then writes in the charging document that Gray suffered a medical emergency during transport but it doesn't say how, where or when.

Gray family attorney Billy Murphy told 11 News Monday evening that more questions were raised than answered.

"They raised questions, they promise transparency and then we didn't get it, and we didn't get any questions to the ones they raised," Murphy said. "Under the Officer's Bill of Rights, the officers don't have to cooperate with the investigation. They can take the Fifth Amendment and they shed no light on whether that's what they did."

More: Police release timeline in Gray's arrest

During the news conference Monday, Deputy Police Commissioner Jerry Rodriguez reiterated a police timeline of events that led to Gray's arrest and showed video from one CCTV camera near the scene.

- 8:39:52, at 1700 Pressbury, a unit says on the radio 'I got him.'

- 8:40:12, 'We got one' An officer has stopped Gray at this time.

"Mr. Gray gave up without the use of force. An officer took his Taser out but never deployed the Taser," Rodriguez said.

- 8:42:52, a wagon is requested for transport and Gray asks for an inhaler

Batts said Gray could have received better care while in custody.

"He asked for the inhaler as he was going into (the van) at one or two of the stops, it was noticed that he was having a little trouble breathing, where we probably should have asked for paramedics or had him look into that at that time," Batts said.

- 8:46:02, The driver of the prisoner transport van believes Gray is acting irate in the back

- 8:46:12, a unit asks the wagon to stop so the paperwork can be completed; Gray is placed in leg irons and put back in the wagon

- 8:54:02, the van leaves

- 8:59:02, the driver picks up another prisoner and asks for an additional unit to check on Gray

"Mr. Gray was the only one on that side of the van, and it wasn't until the very end that another suspect was placed in the van, who we have interviewed, but that suspect was on the other side of a metal barrier with no contact with Mr. Gray. He could hear Mr. Gray, but he could not see him," Rodriguez said.

- 9:24, the van arrives at the Western District and a medic is called

"Part of what our investigation will do -- there is no video of these stops -- is to identify what was going on, what was said by Mr. Gray, what was relayed by the officers and what actions, if any, we took or what actions we should have taken," Rodriguez said.

More: Witness says police threw man into vehicle

Friday, a witness, who did not want to be identified, told the 11 News I-Team that she watched how police handled Gray when the van carrying him stopped at a second location so leg irons could be applied.

"They threw him in the paddy wagon face first, you know face down, and mind you, his arms and legs are locked up," the witness said. "He was laying on his stomach when they threw him. He was still on his stomach position and they just threw him in the paddy wagon. It was like four police."

"We've all seen the videos ... the actions of our officers appear to be calm, they do not appear to be angry or overbearing," Batts said.

Police: Autopsy shows no evidence for use of force

"The autopsy was done today (Monday) ... We have no evidence of any use of force," Rodriguez said.

Rodriguez said the autopsy shows Gray suffered a serious injury to his spinal cord that caused his death. There were no broken limbs or other injury to his body.

"What we don't have at this point is how Mr. Gray sustained those injuries," Rodriguez said.

Sources told the 11 News I-Team that the van made a third stop to pick up another prisoner. At that location, sources said, Gray was unresponsive, but no medic was called until the wagon reached the Western District precinct around 9:24 a.m.

"When Mr. Gray was taken out of that van, he could not talk and he could not breathe," Rodriguez said.

Department policy requires police to "ensure the safety of the detainee in custody" and "ensure medical treatment for a detainee is obtained when necessary or requested."

Experts told the 11 News I-Team that the type of injury Gray suffered could have been caused by sudden and forceful motion, whiplash or striking one's chin on something with the head snapping back.

Commissioner: Investigation will be completed by next Friday

Batts said a task force working solely on this investigation will send to the Baltimore City State's Attorney's Office a report next Friday. Batts said he will also call for an independent review board to review the investigation.

"As this investigation continues, we will take corrective action whenever and wherever is necessary," Batts said.

Investigators from the Baltimore City State's Attorney's Office were in the west Baltimore neighborhood Monday afternoon interviewing witnesses. Earlier Monday, the prosecutor's office released a statement, saying: "While I cannot discuss the details in the death of Freddie Gray due to the ongoing investigation, I can assure the public that my office has dedicated all its existing resources to independently investigate this matter to determine whether criminal charges will be brought. We encourage anyone with information on this incident to contact our office at 443-984-6000 or on our website stattorney.org by clicking on our police integrity tab."

Batts said he is ordering new procedures for the transport of prisoners, including ensuring prisoners get medical attention when requested and making sure transport officers are certified in first aid and CPR.

Protesters demand justice for Gray

Monday evening, dozens of protesters marched from the west Baltimore location where Gray was arrested to the Western District police station. Police officers stood by calmly facing the crowd, which grew larger and emotional.

"We want to see justice for the people who have been killed by police. We want to see justice for Freddie Gray, who was brutally murdered in Baltimore City, our community," said Mike Hachey.

"It's not acceptable to keep doing this. There's no justification for some of the things that are going down. So, if nobody's going to do something, as a community, we're going to have to stick together or we are going to keep getting run over," said Lakiesa McLane.

A man who identified himself as Gray's brother said he's angry about what happened and not satisfied with the investigation.

"How do you take a man, put him in handcuffs and then feel as though you want to hurt him dead? It's a human being! I wouldn't even do that do my dog. I wouldn't do that to my fish. I wouldn't just take him out to just look at him suffer," he said.

Earlier Monday, protesters converged on City Hall seeking answers as to how Gray died and they want the officers involved with his arrest to be held accountable.

"Tell the truth and stop the lies. Freddie Gray didn't have to die," one protester shouted.

The Rev. C.D. Witherspoon, with Baltimore's Southern Christian Leadership Conference, expressed frustration over what he said is a lack of accountability within the Baltimore City Police Department.

"We're calling for these cops to be charged. We're calling for them to be criminalized," Witherspoon said. "We're sick and tired of being sick and tired of that uniform safeguarding people from the same justice that all of us have to endure."

Protesters carried their message through the streets of downtown to city police headquarters with dozens of officers standing guard.

WBAL-TV 11 News reporters Karen Campbell, George Lettis and Kai Reed, and WBALTV.com editor Greg Ng contributed to this report

32484078