Today's game will be available on MLB.TV and will be televised locally by the teams' respective regional sports networks.

BALTIMORE -- Due to circumstances involving riots and protests in the city of Baltimore, today's Orioles-White Sox game will begin at 2:05 p.m. ET and be closed to the public. In addition, this weekend's games against the Rays, originally scheduled to be played at Camden Yards, have been moved to Tampa Bay.

BALTIMORE -- Due to circumstances involving riots and protests in the city of Baltimore, today's Orioles-White Sox game will begin at 2:05 p.m. ET and be closed to the public. In addition, this weekend's games against the Rays, originally scheduled to be played at Camden Yards, have been moved to Tampa Bay.

Today's game will be available on MLB.TV and will be televised locally by the teams' respective regional sports networks.

View Full Game Coverage

All fans with tickets to any of the games scheduled to be played Wednesday through Sunday may exchange their tickets for any remaining home game this season on a "dollar-for-dollar" basis.

Both Monday's and Tuesday's games against Chicago were postponed due to safety concerns in the downtown Baltimore area, as the city is currently in a state of emergency and is receiving assistance from the National Guard in an attempt to restore order.

The two games will be made up as part of a single-admission doubleheader at Oriole Park on Thursday, May 28, starting at 4:05 p.m.

The Orioles will be the home team in the games played on Friday, Saturday and Sunday at Tropicana Field in St. Petersburg. Game times will be 7:05 p.m. ET on Friday and Saturday and 1:35 p.m. on Sunday.

Video: Ghiroli on the postponement of Orioles game

Baltimore has been at the center of national attention as protests that started over the weekend over the death of Freddie Gray have grown violent in pockets of the city.

The Office of the Commissioner said in a statement that it will continue to monitor the situation and will remain in communication with the Orioles regarding their discussions with the Baltimore City Police Department and other local officials.

"After conversations with the Orioles and local officials, we believe that these decisions are in the best interests of fan safety and the deployment of city resources," Commissioner Rob Manfred said. "Our thoughts are with all those who have been affected by violence in Baltimore, and everyone in our game hopes for peace and the safety of a great American city."

Tickets for Monday's postponed game will be valid for the doubleheader on May 28. Fans unable to attend the doubleheader will have an opportunity to exchange their tickets for any remaining home game this season. Fans with tickets for Tuesday's postponed game must exchange those tickets to attend the doubleheader on May 28 or exchange them for any remaining home game this season. Exchanges for both games will be completed on a "dollar-for-dollar" basis.

All tickets are subject to availability, and exchanges must be completed by June 30. Complimentary tickets are non-exchangeable.

Ticket exchanges can be made at the Oriole Park box office or submitted in writing along with the original tickets and mailed via certified mail by June 30 to:

Baltimore Orioles

Attention: (Date) Postponement

333 West Camden Street

Baltimore, MD 21201

Fans with questions regarding the ticket-exchange process should contact Orioles Fan Services at 1-888-848-BIRD.

Brittany Ghiroli is a reporter for MLB.com. Read her blog, Britt's Bird Watch, and follow her on Facebook and Twitter @britt_ghiroli.