Baltimore's Murder Total For May Climbs To 43

Baltimore City has now recorded 43 murders in May, making this the second deadliest month on record.

The latest killing took place Sunday morning in the 1900 block of North Collington Avenue in East Baltimore. Police say two men were shot in the back. One of them died at the scene, while the other was hospitalized.

This is one of three murders that took place Sunday in the city.

Police say two men were found shot in the head at around 1:15 a.m. Sunday in the 2000 block of Belair Road.

The victims have not been identified.

City police also report a non-fatal shooting that took place in the first block of Gilmor Street at 9 p.m. Sunday night. Two men were shot. They were taken to the hospital for treatment.

RECORD DEATHS IN THE CITY

Police began tallying these records in 1970, and May is apparently the second deadliest month in that 45 year period.

The deadliest month in that period was in December, 1971, when 44 people were killed in the city.

There have been more than 100 non-fatal shootings this month.

COMMUNITY RESPONSE

Some clergy in Baltimore have asked Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake to declare a state of emergency to address the problem.

Rev. Keith Green, pastor of Word of God Ministries in Northwest Baltimore, tells Maryland's News This Week that such a declaration may be too late to address the problem. Listen below:

"I believe there was a state of emergency before the riots," said Rev. Green. "When you think about the fact that young African American men, 37-percent can't get a job, can't find work. I think the state of emergency was in place a long time ago."

Green's church held a community fair and March on Saturday to address residents' concerns over crime. He says the spike in crime recently is due in part to a "spiritual break down" among residents.

Green notes that his church plans anti-violence marches and other events to discourage violence every weekend through the summer.

One section of the city that has not seen a spike in violence is the Park Heights and Park Circle neighborhoods.

Officials credit the work of Safe Streets Park Heights for helping to prevent violence, by using ex-offenders and others to mediate conflicts.

James Timpson, who directs the program, tells Maryland's News This Week that there hasn't been a shooting in his neighborhood since March 20. Listen below:

He says that much of the violence is drug or economic related, and the ex-offenders attempt to convince people to solve their conflicts peacefully.

The program exists in four different neighborhoods.

City Councilman Brandon Scott, who is the vice chairman of the Public Safety Committee says he would like to see city officials expand the program. Listen below: