The police’s approach, the group said, reflected deployment changes made by Mr. Bratton earlier this year, under which a unit of patrol officers was assigned to deal with temporary issues, like a rise in a neighborhood’s crime or a large protest.

“Is this the New York City you promised you’d build?” the group asked Mr. de Blasio in its statement.

Mr. Bratton and the chief of department, James P. O’Neill, on Thursday defended the arrests and said the tactics of the department had not changed since December, when some protesters blocked highways and tunnels after a grand jury declined to indict an officer whose chokehold led to the death of Eric Garner, an unarmed black man on Staten Island.

Photo

The Police Department, Mr. Bratton said, did “an extraordinary job last night, and most of the demonstrators did a very good job behaving themselves.”

“Some did not,” he said, and they were arrested. He said the response on Wednesday was a reaction to the behavior of the protesters who were blocking avenues and streets. He said that officers allowed protesters to be in the street so long as they were not blocking traffic but that many “stepped over the line that we had created.”

The rally began in Union Square at sunset Wednesday to denounce the death of Mr. Gray and to criticize the tactics of the police in both Baltimore and New York City, where the use of force has been a charged issue since the death of Mr. Garner.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“It’s all about solidarity,” Carmen Perez, a director of Justice League NYC, said during the rally in Union Square. “We’re here to spread the message of peace from Baltimore’s initial protests.”

Police officers passed out fliers warning the protesters in Union Square that they would be arrested if they blocked traffic. But as night fell, throngs of people spilled into the streets and broke off into smaller groups that snaked through a half-dozen Manhattan neighborhoods as police helicopters hovered overhead.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Freddie Gray, Michael Brown. Shut it down, shut it down,” some of the demonstrators chanted, adding the name of the young, unarmed black man killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., last year to that of Mr. Gray. “Baltimore is everywhere.”

Some of the people who were arrested were seen being thrown roughly to the ground and handcuffed by the police.

“At one point, they blocked off both sides of our march, and we thought they were going to arrest all of us,” said Marie Lewis, 28, who was marching in Midtown.

In Baltimore, Mr. Gray sustained a severe spinal cord injury while in police custody after being arrested on April 12 for possession of a switchblade. His death, the latest involving an encounter between an unarmed black man and police officers, set off protests, riots and looting in the city.