Widespread outrage over the death of Freddie Gray gave way to impromptu celebrations Friday after Baltimore's chief prosecutor filed criminal charges against the six police officers who arrested him, drove him to a police station and ignored his pleas for medical help.

State's Attorney Marilyn J. Mosby charged the driver of the van with second-degree murder and the other officers with offenses that included involuntary manslaughter, vehicular manslaughter, second-degree assault, false imprisonment and misconduct in office. The officers were taken into custody Friday and released on bail.

"These charges are an important step in getting justice for Freddie," said Richard Shipley, stepfather of the 25-year-old Gray, who died April 19, one week after he was injured in police custody.

Mosby's conclusion that Gray had been illegally arrested and suffered a spinal injury while unrestrained in a police transport wagon led to joyous outbursts in many parts of a city that has been under heavy police and National Guard watch and a 10 p.m. curfew following Monday's rioting.

After weeks of tension and occasional violence, it felt as if many exhaled in relief Friday. Gray had become the focus of massive demonstrations, here and in other cities, as the latest in a string of African-American men who died during confrontations with police.

CAPTION Jurors in the upcoming trial of William Porter — one of six Baltimore police officers charged in the arrest and death of Freddie Gray — will not be sequestered in a hotel room and blocked from interacting with family members and others during the proceedings, a judge ruled in a downtown courtroom Tuesday. Jurors in the upcoming trial of William Porter — one of six Baltimore police officers charged in the arrest and death of Freddie Gray — will not be sequestered in a hotel room and blocked from interacting with family members and others during the proceedings, a judge ruled in a downtown courtroom Tuesday. CAPTION Jurors in the upcoming trial of William Porter — one of six Baltimore police officers charged in the arrest and death of Freddie Gray — will not be sequestered in a hotel room and blocked from interacting with family members and others during the proceedings, a judge ruled in a downtown courtroom Tuesday. Jurors in the upcoming trial of William Porter — one of six Baltimore police officers charged in the arrest and death of Freddie Gray — will not be sequestered in a hotel room and blocked from interacting with family members and others during the proceedings, a judge ruled in a downtown courtroom Tuesday. CAPTION Freddie Gray can be seen out of the Baltimore police van and on the ground surrounded by police in cell phone video shot April 12, 2015, by Brandon Ross. Ross, a friend of Gray's who was with him that morning, testified in the trial of Officer William G. Porter. Porter is the first of six officers to be tried in the death of Gray after he was taken into custody. (Baltimore Sun video) Freddie Gray can be seen out of the Baltimore police van and on the ground surrounded by police in cell phone video shot April 12, 2015, by Brandon Ross. Ross, a friend of Gray's who was with him that morning, testified in the trial of Officer William G. Porter. Porter is the first of six officers to be tried in the death of Gray after he was taken into custody. (Baltimore Sun video) CAPTION Members of the Baltimore City Council along with other elected officials and dignitaries have ask men to step up and volunteer to mentors for city boys. Members of the Baltimore City Council along with other elected officials and dignitaries have ask men to step up and volunteer to mentors for city boys. CAPTION Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake was among those attending the reopening Tuesday of the Rite Aid drug store on Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard. The store had been ransacked during the April riot following the death of Freddie Gray. (Lloyd Fox/Baltimore Sun) Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake was among those attending the reopening Tuesday of the Rite Aid drug store on Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard. The store had been ransacked during the April riot following the death of Freddie Gray. (Lloyd Fox/Baltimore Sun) CAPTION Federal and local authorities on Monday offered a $5,000 reward for information leading to the identification and arrest of two men wanted in assaults during the April 27 riot in Baltimore. Federal and local authorities on Monday offered a $5,000 reward for information leading to the identification and arrest of two men wanted in assaults during the April 27 riot in Baltimore.

The case stood in stark contrast to others across the nation in which police officers were cleared of wrongdoing in the deaths of black men. Grand juries declined to indict the officer who put a chokehold on Eric Garner in Staten Island, N.Y., or the officer who fatally shot Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo.

Baltimore's police union president, Gene Ryan, said none of the officers charged are responsible for Gray's death. Michael E. Davey, an attorney who works with the union and is representing one of the officers, decried what he called an "egregious rush to judgment."

Meanwhile, Gray's family continued to implore protesters, who are expected to march Saturday in a previously scheduled rally, to remain peaceful.

"Whoever comes to our city — a city that we love, a city that we live in — come in peace. If you are not coming in peace, please don't come at all," said Shipley, accompanied at a news conference by Gray's mother, Gloria Darden; his father, Freddie Gray Sr.; and twin sister, Fredericka.

"This city needs to get back to work. The last thing that Freddie would want is to see the hardworking people of Baltimore lose their jobs and businesses because of this."

City officials had warned residents not to expect the conclusion of a police investigation Thursday to immediately lead to an announcement on whether officers would be charged. They feared that dashed hopes could lead to more violence.

But on the steps of the War Memorial Building on Friday, Mosby said the police findings were not new to her and that she had been working on her own investigation.

Her conclusion: "The manner of death deemed a homicide by the State Medical Examiner is believed to be the result of a fatal injury that occurred while Mr. Gray was unrestrained by a seatbelt in the custody of the Baltimore Police Department wagon."

Baltimoreans watched Mosby's announcement live on TV. In neighborhoods previously filled with chanting demonstrators, cheers rang out and car horns honked.

On East Lorraine Avenue in Harwood, where Freddie Gray lived with his mother and sisters, someone played a radio airing a continuous loop of Mosby reading the charges.

At Gilmor Homes, where Gray spent his last moments of freedom, young men remembered "a friend we ain't never going to be able to replace," as lifelong friend Rontee Jenkins, 26, put it.

Yet the tears shed by Jenkins, who helped carry Gray's casket at his funeral on Monday, were of joy.

"I want my friend not to go in vain," he said.

Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake ordered the officers suspended without pay.

"To those of you who want to engage in brutality, misconduct, racism and corruption, let me be clear: There is no place for you in the Baltimore City Police Department," she said in a brief appearance at City Hall.

President Barack Obama said, "It is absolutely vital that the truth comes out on what happened to Freddie Gray.

"It is my practice not to comment on the legal processes involved. That would not be appropriate.

"But I can tell you that justice needs to be served. All the evidence needs to be presented," he said. "What I think the people of Baltimore want more than anything else is the truth. ... That's what people around the country expect."

Under gray skies, Mosby read a probable-cause statement, the basis for arresting the officers, in an even voice as traffic occasionally rumbled past on Fayette Street. Although the outlines of Gray's arrest and transport were widely known, her recitation of a fuller narrative proved riveting.

Two of her repeated themes: that the handcuffed and leg-shackled Gray was never secured by a seatbelt in the police wagon against police policy, and that officers ignored repeated appeals for medical help from Gray.

Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., the driver of the van, was charged with second-degree murder, three counts of manslaughter and assault. Lt. Brian W. Rice was charged with manslaughter, assault and false imprisonment. Sgt. Alicia D. White and Officer William G. Porter were charged with manslaughter and assault. Officers Garrett E. Miller and Edward M. Nero were charged with assault and false imprisonment. All were charged with misconduct in office.

The arrest on the morning of April 12 began when Rice made eye contact with Gray near the corner of North Avenue and Mount Street. Gray ran, and Rice, along with Miller and Nero chased him.

Gray surrendered in the 1700 block of Presbury St., where Mosby said "he was placed in a prone position, with his hands handcuffed behind his back." It was there that Gray first asked for and was denied medical care, she said.

"It was at this time that Mr. Gray indicated that he could not breathe and requested an inhaler to no avail," she said.

Officers discovered he had a knife with its blade folded into the handle, she said. It wasn't a switchblade but a legal implement.

Having failed to establish probable cause, Mosby said the officers' arrest of Gray was illegal.

And then began the van ride, which stopped four times for various reasons, as the unrestrained Gray injured his neck and his condition deteriorated.