Cars set ablaze. Stores looted. Rocks thrown at the police. Does it all add up to a #riot or an #uprising?

With the images of unrest in Baltimore spreading worldwide, a debate has broken out over what to call what is going on. For many, describing the events of Monday night as a riot feels somehow inaccurate, and offensive — an effort to diminish the structural problems, like police brutality, that they see as the cause of so much frustration and anger.

Many people on Twitter referred back to Martin Luther King Jr., who refused to simply condemn riots, seeking instead to place them in the context of his broader struggle for equality.

When Martin Luther King, Jr.'s words ring true now more than ever. #FreddieGray #Balitmore pic.twitter.com/bcHktRLciu — Linda Sarsour (@lsarsour) April 28, 2015

But experts note that this is not the first time a semantic battle has broken out over social unrest. After the “riots” of April 1968 in Baltimore (the common term at the time) residents, journalists and scholars have wrestled with how to label the violent unrest that left six people dead and 700 injured, along with around 1,000 small businesses looted or burned.

Rev. Marion Bascom, an African-American civil rights activist, said he preferred the term “disturbances” to “riots.”

“I call it ‘disturbances,’” he said, “because in a real sense, there was during that time, so much hope – H-O-P-E – that things would change.”

Other residents, contributing to an oral history of 1968 events led by the University of Baltimore also rejected the term “riot” – including a man named Art Cohen, who was hit in the head with a golf club when he was taking photographs of the crowds. He said “riot” was too reductive.

“’Riot’ is a negative word and that’s the reason I don’t use it,” he said. He added that what occurred reflected something deeper than the word “riot” suggested. “I felt at that point people had such grief and sense of loss and anger that they had to express it somehow.”

Many of the people rejecting the word “riot” today are expressing a similar sentiment.

Elizabeth Nix, an assistant professor of history at the University of Baltimore, who quotes Mr. Cohen in a yet-to-be-published paper, said that she feels neither the episode this week, nor the one in 1968, deserve to be called riots, for the reasons Mr. Bascom describes.

But other scholars question whether the attempt to control the language — on and off social media — reflects little more than an urge to gloss over the violence and destruction that occurred.

“Part of this is an affectation to give political meaning to behavior that may not have political content,” said David J. Garrow, a civil rights historian at the University of Pittsburgh. “We’ve got observers perhaps trying to give greater meaning to the behavior that the people involved may intend.”

“‘Uprising’ is an attempt to give political meaning to the behavior,” Mr. Garrow added. “But to my mind, this effort to “label it with political meaning largely fails if you’re targeting random retailing establishments not government institutions.”

So far at least, the #riot crowd seems to be winning. Topsy, the Twitter tracking service, counted around 50 tweets in the past 24 hours with the terms #Baltimore and #uprising — and more than 2,000 tweets with #Baltimore and #riots.