Baltimore City police leaders said opiates are to blame for a recent spike in crime.

Mobile users tap here to watch video

Advertisement

Police officials said 27 pharmacies were looted during the riots and unrest in April, which is 10 more pharmacies looted than first reported. Additionally, there were two methadone clinics that were looted.

Also: DEA: Gangs targeted pharmacies to loot during riots

With more than 60 percent of the facilities reporting so far, authorities said there were more than 175,000 dosage units stolen, and they're still counting.

"There's enough narcotics on the streets of Baltimore to keep it intoxicated for a year. That amount of drugs has thrown off the balance on the streets of Baltimore. We're seeing the repercussions of these crimes throughout the community. Individuals are getting high to a greater degree and at a greater pace than any time before. Criminals are selling those stolen drugs, there are turf wars happening, which are leading to violence and shootings in our city," Batts said.

There were 43 homicides in May, the highest month since the 1970s. There have been 219 non-fatal shootings so far this year, compared to 120 last year to date. That's an 82 percent increase year to year.

"I think that part of it's connected to turf battles between gangs and independent drug dealers. You also have a new source, a new inventory of drugs on the street that people have to sell, and they're selling to a limited number of people, so they're vying for that customer base," said Gary Tuggle, assistant special agent in charge of the DEA Baltimore field office.

"That amount of drugs has thrown off the balance on the streets of Baltimore. We're seeing the repercussions of these crimes throughout the community," Batts said.

The DEA said smaller pharmacies haven't reported yet because they don't have computer systems like the larger pharmacy chains. The DEA also said the records at the smaller pharmacies were destroyed in the looting.

Batts said officers have made dozens of arrests and there are multiple warrants for arrests open.

Batts also announced the arrest of Kevin Pyatt in connection with a double shooting on Memorial Day that left a 9-year-old boy shot in the leg.