Protesters jammed Union Square and clashed with NYPD officers as they marched through the streets of New York City in solidarity with Baltimore activists Wednesday night, briefly shutting down the Holland Tunnel and snarling traffic along the West Side Highway - resulting in at least 100 arrests.

What began as a small gathering at Union Square around 6 p.m. swelled to more than 1,000 people, many holding "Justice 4 Freddie Gray" placards while chanting "Black Lives Matter" and continued into the early hours Thursday.

A protester is detained by NYPD during a demonstration calling for social, economic and racial justice. (ANDREW KELLY/REUTERS) Onlookers film and snap photos as a protester is taken into custody in Times Square. (Barry Williams for New York Daily News) Demonstrators fill Union Square Park during a march Wednesday to protest police brutality in the wake of the recent deaths of Freddie Gray, Eric Garner, Michael Brown and other unarmed civilians. (Stephanie Keith for New York Daily News) Police grapple with a protester near W. 35th St. Cops reported that at least 100 people were taken into custody on Wednesday as crowds demonstrated against police brutality. (Stephanie Keith for New York Daily News) Protesters and police during a solidarity protest for Baltimore and Freddie Gray at Union Square on Wednesday. (Andrew Lamberson/for New York Daily News) Protesters make their way uptown from Union Square to 18th St.., where a number of arrests were made. (Stephanie Keith for New York Daily News) Demonstrators snarl traffic as they try to block an entrance to the Holland Tunnel Wednesday night during a solidarity protest following the death of Freddie Gray in Baltimore, (Michael Abbott/Getty Images)

"Freddie Gray, Michael Brown, shut the whole system down!" the crowd shouted and then broke into several smaller protests, moving on to Herald Square, Times Square, Columbus Circle and everywhere in between.

NYPD officers, many wearing riot helmets and carrying handfuls of plastic cuffs, were seen loading several activists into police vans.

REPORT: FREDDIE GRAY TRIED 'TO INJURE HIMSELF' IN POLICE VAN

"We walked to West Side Highway and the cops cornered people so people were fighting back," Chris Carmack, 18, a political science major at Hunter who lives in Flatbush, told the Daily News.

He came to the protest with his roommate.

"I got a baton to the temple and my roommate got a baton to the stomach," said Carmack, who claims cops retaliated when a protester hurled a water bottle at them.

A man is arrested on East 17th Street during a solidarity protest for Baltimore and Freddie Gray at Union Square on Wednesday. (Andrew Lamberson/for New York Daily News) An NYPD arrest during a solidarity protest for Baltimore and Freddie Gray at Union Square on Wednesday. (Andrew Lamberson/for New York Daily News) Police take protesters into custody in Manhattan on Wednesday. The protest was organized to oppose the death of Freddie Gray.

Protesters rally in Manhattan demanding justice for Freddie Gray

Video shows the moment cops moved in to disrupt the peaceful rally, getting physical with protesters by now flooding Broadway and E. 17th St.

"Get in there and pick somebody out. Not the press." an unidentified NYPD captain said as he pushed a fellow cop toward the crowd.

One officer was seen manhandling an older woman and tossing her to the pavement as she shrieked.

RELATED: BALTIMORE CALMS UNDER CURFEW AS PROTESTS IGNITE ELSEWHERE

Another marcher was put in what appeared to be a headlock by an NYPD officer near Madison Square Garden.

Police reported more than 100 people in custody waiting to be processed at 10:30 p.m., many of them detained along the West Side Highway near the tunnel.

Marchers were warned to stay off the street and not to block traffic or risk getting arrested. The NYPD handed out flyers and announced their rules of engagement with an audio recording.

It didn't deter the likes of Nes Roberts, 40, from Flatbush.

"I couldn't be in my bed knowing that people from all walks of life are out here and black youths are getting killed," Roberts told The News. "I couldn't see not coming out here when people like myself are getting killed."

SIEGEL: HILLARY CLINTON'S JUSTICE REFORM VOW NOT EASY

At least one officer was hurt. NYPD Capt. Brendan Timoney was struck on the chin by a flying object at Fifth Ave. and 17th St., cops said.

There was no word on other injuries.

NYPD van full of peaceful protesters including @NLGnews legal observer at Union Sq. #BaltimoreUprising solidarity NYC pic.twitter.com/3TCMmKEc5K — Keegan Stephan (@KeeganNYC) April 30, 2015

Freddie Gray, 25, died more than two weeks ago after his spine was nearly severed while in Baltimore police custody.

His death sparked fiery riots in Baltimore and the latest in a series of rallies that have gripped NYC since a violent summer that saw the deaths of Eric Garner in Staten Island and Michael Brown Jr. in Ferguson, Mo., at the hands of cops.

Several more high-profile incidents have happened since then from Cleveland to South Carolina, casting a light on racial justice and police use of force.

Police and protesters clash at Union Square during a rally protesting police brutality and the recent death of Freddie Gray in Baltimore. (Reed Dunlea) Police and protesters clash at Union Square during a rally protesting police brutality and the recent death of Freddie Gray in Baltimore. (Reed Dunlea) Police and protesters clash at Union Square during a rally protesting police brutality and the recent death of Freddie Gray in Baltimore. (Reed Dunlea) Man is subdued by police during a march protesting the recent death of Freddie Gray in Baltimore. (Stephanie Keith for New York Daily News) Demonstrator is restrained by police during the march. (Stephanie Keith for New York Daily News) A protester yells as an NYPD officer looks on during a march in the streets of Manhattan in a demonstration held to support Baltimore's protests against police brutality following the death of Freddie Gray. (GARY HE/EPA)

Protesters fill Union Square during a "Solidarity With City of Baltimore" rally on Wednesday. (Kena Betancur/Getty Images) Arrests are made in Times Square Wednesday night. (Barry Williams for New York Daily News) Citizens record the action in Times Square with their smartphones and cameras as police arrest protesters. (Barry Williams for New York Daily News) Hands raised, protesters march up Park Ave. on their way to the West Side. (Stephanie Keith for New York Daily News) A woman rides a CitiBike through Union Square during a solidarity protest for Baltimore and Freddie Gray at Union Square on Wednesday. (Andrew Lamberson/for New York Daily News)

While Baltimore was mostly quiet Wednesday night, protests also sprung up in Boston, Seattle, Minneapolis, Houston and several smaller cities around the nation.

Follow on Twitter @jmolinet

ON A MOBILE DEVICE?WATCH FIRST VIDEO HERE. WATCH SECOND VIDEO HERE. WATCH THIRD VIDEO HERE.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!