UPDATE 2:49 AM: Rate of arson has eclipsed the fire department’s ability to control each blaze.

Firefighter tells me Baltimore fire department is "totally out of resources" — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 28, 2015

Heard the same from one of the firefighters. He literally told me "we're f**ked" #Baltimore https://t.co/gKnwqhW509 — Alexey Yaroshevsky (@Yaro_RT) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 2:07 AM: Cutting of fire hoses still a concern.

Cops on every fire truck in Baltimore to keep people from cutting fire hoses — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 2:05 AM: Fires and lootings continue to pop up through the night.

#Baltimore on fire. FD scanner reports of at least a dozen dwelling fires across the city pic.twitter.com/7yR7jCxSxf — Alexey Yaroshevsky (@Yaro_RT) April 28, 2015

Another CVS on fire in Baltimore pic.twitter.com/cvRn11N3J0 — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 28, 2015

Just tried reporting a store break-in and looting at the 7-Eleven on Charles in Saratoga. No operators are picking up 911 calls. — Paul Gessler (@PaulGessler) April 28, 2015

Baltimore City Chief's car gets winshield broken by thrown rock while en-route to fire on Smallwood Ave where someone was trapped inside. — Baltimore Metro News (@BaltMetroNews) April 28, 2015

Just did a loop around the city. An intact building two hours ago was burned out now — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 28, 2015

There's a structure fire at N Hilton St & Piedmont Av. @BaltimoreFire is on the scene. #baltimoreprotests — Baltimore OEM (@BaltimoreOEM) April 28, 2015

Another pharmacy on fire. The Rite Aid at Saratoga and MLK pic.twitter.com/WYD7ZrtJok — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 28, 2015

Cop at the scene said this was the third fire he's been to in 45 minutes — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 12:32 AM: More fires.

We are receiving reports of a fire at Mount and Baker Streets. Officers are responding to the area with our partners from BCFD. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 28, 2015

There's a structure fire at N Mount St & Baker St. @BaltimoreFire on the scene. — Baltimore OEM (@BaltimoreOEM) April 28, 2015

Another building on fire. Baker and N Mount #BalitmoreRiots pic.twitter.com/rOlfod0OIr — Alexey Yaroshevsky (@Yaro_RT) April 28, 2015

#Baltimore on fire. FD scanner reports of at least a dozen dwelling fires across the city pic.twitter.com/7yR7jCxSxf — Alexey Yaroshevsky (@Yaro_RT) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 12:12 AM: Compare and contrast: a representative from Obama’s “My Brother’s Keeper” program attended Gray’s funeral today. To this day, President Obama has not once publicly acknowledged the death of Navy SEAL Chris Kyle.

UPDATE 12:10 AM: Devastation.

UPDATE 11:49 PM: As police brief the press, the streets are still in chaos:

There's a structure fire in the 1800 blk of Pennsylvania Av. @BaltimoreFire is on scene. — Baltimore OEM (@BaltimoreOEM) April 28, 2015

There's a man standing here who says he was carjacked at gunpoint by 4 youth and is stranded; no response to 911 call, he says — Justin Fenton (@justin_fenton) April 28, 2015

SCANNER: reports of a loud explosion at Franklin and Evergreen streets. — Yvonne Wenger (@yvonnewenger) April 28, 2015

Police scanners: People walking around with guns out in the open. #BaltimoreProtest #BaltimoreRiots #Baltimore — Michelle Macaluso (@Michelle_Mac1) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 11:41 PM: Police Commissioner press conference giving update from law enforcement:

Commish Batts, sounding tired & hoarse confirms this was organized and carried out — at first — by high school students. — Kate Amara (@kateamaraWBAL) April 28, 2015

Batts: 50 officers secured Lexington Market — wbaltv.com (@wbaltv11) April 28, 2015

"I was pleased and surprised to see we had ministers, Congressman Elijah Cummings" trying to calm rioters, Batts says. — Colin Campbell (@cmcampbell6) April 28, 2015

.@BaltimorePolice #Batts – all of injured officers are going to be okay, struck in the head, kneecap and broken bones — Phil Yacuboski (@WBALPhil) April 28, 2015

Batts acknowledged that police were outnumbered. — Erica L. Green (@EricaLG) April 28, 2015

.@BaltimorePolice #Batts – Says Bloods, Crips and BGF had a meeting yesterday to kill officers after #FreddyGray funeral — Phil Yacuboski (@WBALPhil) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 11:38 PM: Out: “riots.” In: “uprising.”

Y'all, I just cannot use the hashtag #BaltimoreRiots. Today, I saw an uprising. — deray mckesson (@deray) April 28, 2015

Riots are what happened in Kentucky after the basketball team lost the championship.What we're seeing is an international wave of UPRISINGS. — Marc Lamont Hill (@marclamonthill) April 28, 2015

This country spent a decade consuming Black #Baltimore's misery as entertainment on TV but now when real people rise up ppl r appalled. — Piper Anderson (@PiperAnderson1) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 11:22 PM: While Gray’s family gave statements condemning violence, the attorney representing them and Freddie, Billy Murphy, whips up hatred against Baltimore Police. Paints entire department as violent and brutal, then claims police faked gang threats to “divide” the city.

#FreddieGray fam speaks. Sis says "they aren't doing this violence for Freddie. They're doing it for something else" pic.twitter.com/3dzv8aiiPp — Kaitlin Newman (@KaitlinObscura) April 28, 2015

Billy Murphy asks folks to raise their hands if they know a victim of police brutality. pic.twitter.com/JzXG0NVo9Q — Mark Puente (@MarkPuente) April 28, 2015

"Thank God for cell phone video cameras because the truth will come out" -Billy Murphy, Gray family speaks out against violence #LiveOnFOX45 — FOX Baltimore (@FOXBaltimore) April 28, 2015

Murphy alludes to police kart about gangs: call it's a. "False alarm cooked up to divide this city even farther." — Mark Puente (@MarkPuente) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 11:14 PM: Mayor Rawlings-Blake gives a new statement. Local pastors and gang members are present at a church where Eddie Gray’s family spoke out against the riots.

.@MayorSRB on @wbaltv11 "We can not let our city devolve into chaos because of a small group of criminals." — Phil Yacuboski (@WBALPhil) April 28, 2015

Billy Murphy and ministers appear with Crips and Bloods to say they r all against riots pic.twitter.com/DWW0NwHQA4 — DougDonovan (@DougDonovan) April 28, 2015

Appluse for members of Crips and Bloods as they stand with clergy. New Shiloh Baptist Church pic.twitter.com/UofkGEAKQ0 — Karen Campbell (@KarenCampbellTV) April 28, 2015

"This is one of our darkest days as a city" pic.twitter.com/TGqSsg3WdD — Justin Fenton (@justin_fenton) April 28, 2015

UPDATE 11:11 PM: Parenting.

Photo of #Baltimore mother slapping her son for participating in riots, taken by @ABC2NEWS photog Manny Locke. pic.twitter.com/z9yppJL3Ey — WSOCTV (@wsoctv) April 28, 2015

Would LOVE to see a whole lot more of this going on. These kids need to have their asses handed to them. #Repost @ine3 ・・・ That awkward moment your mom catches you rioting 😂😂😂😂 #baltimore #baltimoreriots #prayforthiskid A video posted by Gianni Two (@_gtwo) on Apr 27, 2015 at 7:33pm PDT

UPDATE: 11:05 PM: Baltimore public school teacher blames police for first rounds of the riot, saying “I’d be ready to pop off, too,” because police were responding to the “purge” messages by gearing up and interrogating groups of students.

Here is what happened this afternoon according to a #Baltimore public teacher. pic.twitter.com/gAHZWGjMLo — TC (@tchopstl) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 10:55 PM: Police re-deploying, National Guard moving in from another town.

BREAKING: Maryland National Guard trucks now leaving Reisterstown, heading for city of Baltimore @nbcwashington — Jackie Bensen (@jackiebensen) April 28, 2015

We are continuing to redeploy officers across the city to ensure everyone remains safe. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 10:46 PM: Fires are popping up as quickly as they’re put out, and looting of local stores continues:

Fire out East seems to be out and under control pic.twitter.com/T7WfCrcbGm — Kaitlin Newman (@KaitlinObscura) April 28, 2015

Fells Pt liquor store looted. Group of teenagers. Employee hit over head with bottle pic.twitter.com/4GVH9GsES7 — Jayne Miller (@jemillerwbal) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 10:32 PM: At least 15 officers are now reportedly injured–and two are still in the hospital. CNN quotes Lt. Col. Darryl De Sousa, chief of patrol for the Baltimore Police, to say this is “unacceptable.”

15 officers were injured, 2 are still hospitalized. It’s unacceptable – Lt. Col. Darryl De Sousaon #BaltimoreRiots pic.twitter.com/7q8Fyk0oo2 — Anderson Cooper 360° (@AC360) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 10:28 PM: Loretta Lynch’s first official act as Attorney General will be sending DOJ officials to Baltimore.

Vanita Gupta, who head’s the Civil Rights Division, and Director of Community Oriented Policing Services Ronald Davis “will be traveling to Baltimore to meet with faith and community leaders, as well as city officials,” Lynch said in a statement. “I condemn the senseless acts of violence by some individuals in Baltimore that have resulted in harm to law enforcement officers, destruction of property and a shattering of the peace in the city of Baltimore,” Lynch said. “Those who commit violent actions, ostensibly in protest of the death of Freddie Gray, do a disservice to his family, to his loved ones, and to legitimate peaceful protestors who are working to improve their community for all its residents.”

UPDATE: 10:26 PM: Another journalist attacked.

Our @CCTV_America cameraman was just attacked by protestors and his camera stolen. #FreddyGray pic.twitter.com/STR6e9LowT — jim spellman (@jimspellmanTV) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 10:04 PM: Wire services have published a slew of photos depicting the violence and looting gripping Baltimore.

UPDATE: 9:57 PM: A pastor expressed anger and sorrow that rioters destroyed a housing structure meant to provide inexpensive, affordable housing for elderly Baltimore residents. Rioters reportedly injured five journalists.

Those of you who can make it to North and Division tell the police you're with Pastor Hickman to help calm the kids down. — Donte Hickman (@DrDonteLHickman) April 27, 2015

I need all my men to meet me at New Shiloh Baptist Church now. We have to get these streets under control. — Donte Hickman (@DrDonteLHickman) April 27, 2015

Pastor Hickman: burning building was to be 60-unit affordable housing for seniors. "It hurts my heart," he says. pic.twitter.com/jYXuMMDtBx — Jon Swaine (@jonswaine) April 28, 2015

Pastor says his Baptist church was building affordable senior units here, an 8 year project that has burned down pic.twitter.com/MUD6FYC3TP — Tom Roussey (@tomrousseyABC7) April 28, 2015

By my count so far, five journalists attacked in #BaltimoreRiots -some injuries-photos http://t.co/0tI03SmwkV — al tompkins (@atompkins) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 9:53 PM: Republican Gov. Larry Hogan sharply criticized the mayor of Baltimore for refusing to contact him while riots raged. Watch his full statement:

“We declared the state of emergency and I issued the executive order less than 30 seconds after requested by the City of Baltimore. So, it didn’t take us very long at all. I — signed an executive order almost immediately as soon as we received the call and then called the president, there was no delay whatsoever. We’ve had this emergency operation center activated since Saturday. We’ve had hundreds of state police on the ground. We’ve had every single state agency and local agency coordinated out of this operation already for the entire week. I’ve been in daily communication with the mayor, and others in the city, and our entire team has been involved from day one. But frankly, this is a Baltimore city situation. Baltimore city was in charge. When the mayor called me, which quite frankly, we were glad that she finally did, instantly we signed the executive order. We already had our entire team prepared, and in fact I already called General Singh earlier in the day and asked her to get prepared to be called up. We were all in a command center in the second floor of the State House in constant communication and we were trying to get in touch with the mayor for quite some time. She finally made that call, and we immediately took action.”

UPDATE: 9:44 PM: Rioters shut down Baltimore’s public schools for Tuesday. Reminder: It was high schoolers passing around flyers calling to anarchy and “The Purge” who began to attack cops with bricks.

#Baltimore public schools are closed tomorrow in the wake of violent #BaltimoreRiots. #KellyFile — Megyn Kelly (@megynkelly) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 9:09 PM: Gov. Larry Hogan condemned rioters in a powerful press conference appearance, implicitly criticizing the current mayor for failing to contain the wild violence. President Obama asked him to go easy on the violent rioters who set fire to police cars and wrecked local businesses.

MD Gov. Hogan: “I strongly condemn actions of those who engaged in direct attacks against innocent civilians… & law enforcement officers." — Fox News (@FoxNews) April 28, 2015

MD. Gov. Hogan says he couldn't activate National Guard until Baltimore mayor called –"we are glad that she finally did." — Emily Miller (@EmilyMiller) April 28, 2015

Hogan, "glad the Mayor finely called me" re National Guard. Definitely hinting at being dismayed by her delay. — Luke Russert (@LukeRussert) April 28, 2015

Obama asked Hogan 'to exercise restraint' — Hogan agreed but said he didn't intend to let 'thugs' rampage — Glenn Thrush (@GlennThrush) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 8:52 PM: Former Baltimore mayor Martin O’Malley and possible 2016 Democratic challenger ended a European trip, where he was scheduled to give paid speeches, to fly back to Baltimore.

Meanwhile, presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton tweeted out cliche campaign stickers as riots raged.

Don't miss your chance to get a free Hillary 2016 bumper sticker! https://t.co/l2lPjM5p2l — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 8:43 PM: The Associated Press reports that 15 officers have been injured by the brick-throwing, arson-committing, fire hose-cutting, liquor store looters who are still rampaging through Baltimore.

BREAKING: Police: 15 officers have been injured in Baltimore riot, 2 still in hospital; 2 dozen arrested. — The Associated Press (@AP) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 8:27 PM: Memos obtained by the Washington Times show that a widely-circulated text reading, “Kill all white police officers!! As many as you can!! Bunch of thugs with badges!!” has alarmed law enforcement:

Law enforcement intelligence officials have put out a warning that someone has sent a text calling on people to kill “all white police officers” in reaction to the death of Freddie Gray while in Baltimore police custody, raising fears violence could spread nationally, according to safety memos obtained by The Washington Times. Officers are being warned of possible ambushes and urged to change travel patterns and to tone down clothes or emblems that identify them as police. The Baltimore police department separately put out a press release on Monday saying various gangs, including the Black Guerilla Family, Bloods and Crips “haver entered into a partnership to ‘take out’ law enforcement.”

The Black Guerilla Family allegedly had ties to Ismaaiyl Brinsley, who shot two NYPD cops execution-style in Brooklyn in December, although federal agents denied connections between the two. The gang told members to target white cops to “send a message.”

UPDATE: 8:06 PM: Mayor Rawlings-Blake announced a city-wide, week-long curfew following a day of mayhem and destruction wreaked by rioters.

BREAKING: Baltimore mayor imposing curfew, says 'thugs' trying to tear down city, incite violence. — The Associated Press (@AP) April 28, 2015

UPDATE: 7:42 PM: Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei tweeted his support for a mob that burned down a CVS and looted a liquor store to double-fist champagne while yelling, “No justice, no peace!” Khamenei happily expressed sympathy on for rioters went on to tear their way through a major American city. Americans selfishly abolished slavery for economic gains, he said. If only the Baltimore police had converted to Islam, they would stop committing “crimes against blacks.”

Power & tyranny are different. In some countries like US, police are seemingly powerful but they kill innocents. #FreddieGray #RekiaBoyd — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

On false pretexts US police shoots ppl on streets. This is a type of power which doesn't ensure security but leads to insecurity. #MikeBrown — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

Acquittal of US cops who committed murder is among measures taken by statesmen who ignore humanity& religion. #BlackLivesMatter #WalterScott — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

It's ridiculous that even though US President is black, still such crimes agnst US blacks continue to occur. #BlackLivesMatter #FreddieGray — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

They celebrate a day for abolition of slavery but such crimes are committed against the blacks. #EricGarner #TrayvonMartin #BlackLivesMatter — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

Even abolition of #slavery in #US wasn’t based on humanitarian intents but on North-South wars & conflict b/t landowners & industrialists. — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

Power with cruelty isn’t favored by #Islam. #Police should embody justice and mercy while being potent. pic.twitter.com/EAFn2ybpLm — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) April 26, 2015

UPDATE: 7:26 PM: President Obama promises to “assist” Baltimore as needed, according to CBS Baltimore:

BALTIMORE (CBS Baltimore) — President Barack Obama spoke with both Attorney General Loretta Lynch and Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake Monday regarding the ongoing Baltimore protests surrounding the death of Freddie Gray. Following her swearing in Monday afternoon, Lynch updated Obama on the protests and death of Gray, which is currently being investigated by the Department of Justice. Rawlings-Blake updated the president on the ongoing looting, violence, and efforts to maintain peace throughout the city. Obama highlighted his commitment to assisting the situation as he continues to receive updates from Lynch and White House Senior Adviser Valerie Jarrett.

UPDATE: 7:21 PM: Rival street gangs who promised to unite in order to kill police officers are using their coordination skills to guide media past violent rioters.

I want to thank the two members of the Bloods who walked me to safety and the others who stood around me when bottles were being thrown — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

Gang members are playing a surprisingly important role keeping a semblance of order right now — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 7:07 PM: Gov. Larry Hogan issued an executive order declaring a state of emergency and ordered the National Guard to Baltimore:

ANNAPOLIS, MD – Governor Larry Hogan today, at the request of Baltimore City, has signed an Executive Order declaring a state of emergency and activating the National Guard to address the growing violence and unrest in Baltimore City.

The governor, along with Lt. Governor Boyd Rutherford and National Guard Adjutant General Linda Singh, will hold a press conference at the Maryland Emergency Management Agency this evening at 8:30 PM.

UPDATE: 7:01 PM: Rioters are reportedly cutting fire hoses to stop firemen from putting out the CVS they set ablaze.

The group at Pennsylvania Ave & North Ave has the cut one of the fire department's hoses while they are attempting to put out a fire. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

Someone in Baltimore just cut fire hose with a knife so firefighters can’t put out CVS fire pic.twitter.com/XD9fFehyLK — Oliver Darcy (@oliverdarcy) April 27, 2015

Baltimore CVS set on fire during protest chaos. Fire hose cut as store burns. http://t.co/i7xIb1FJvO pic.twitter.com/vDrdRUazRC — Doyle Murphy (@DoyleMurphy) April 27, 2015

#Baltimore police say protesters have cut the hose being used to put out the fire at CVS. http://t.co/S1dXtwQppa pic.twitter.com/xkXolUqBiZ — WUSA9 (@wusa9) April 27, 2015

This man just actually cut a hose that was putting out a fire on live tv. No need for agitators #BaltimoreRiots pic.twitter.com/tF6oXiwpsq — Rahim Branch (@thereelrahim) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 6:55 PM: It looks like the National Guard is en route to Baltimore.

National guard on 695 — Baltimore BLOC (@BmoreBloc) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 6:49 PM: In a mostly-empty street, one man leapt on top of a van to dance to “Beat It.”

UPDATE: 6:42 PM: CNN contributor Sally Kohn says that while looting is bad, police arresting suspects is worse, which she calls a “pattern of police violence.”

Looting a real shame. But FAR MORE shameful is pattern of police violence against black community! Perspective, people. #BaltimoreRising — Sally Kohn (@sallykohn) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 6:34 PM: In another act of destruction, rioters have set a CVS store ablaze — one right next to senior citizen housing.

LIVE NOW: Heavy fire conditions at the CVS that was heavily looted earlier,North Ave & Penn. Ave @cbsbaltimore #WJZ — Megan Viviano (@megganphone) April 27, 2015

CVS on fire. Building above is senior citizen housing pic.twitter.com/ob69QcSWNk — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

Police standing their ground as smoke billows from front of CVS looted by rioters. More looting at E-Z mart #WJZ @cbsbaltimore — Pat Warren WJZ (@PatWarrenWJZ) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 6:28 PM: Rioters have come across a liquor store and ransacked it. Some are chugging expensive alcohol to celebrate social justice, while others look approvingly at destroyed cars.

Looter with beers pic.twitter.com/8PqteP7dvm — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

Guy shouting "no justice, no peace" at north and Fulton while double fisting pink champagne — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

Looks like liquor store just got looted — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

People walking away from looted liquor store holding bottles shouting "Open BAr" — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

Looted cop car. Bystander walks by pointing "that's justice. That's justice" pic.twitter.com/r9lXohBKyT — Ben Jacobs (@Bencjacobs) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 6:27 PM: Republican Gov. Larry Hogan vows to prosecute rioters, and has put the National Guard on alert.

I have been closely monitoring the situation in #Baltimore and have been in contact with @MayorSRB. #mdpolitics pic.twitter.com/jOZ6JndSly — Larry Hogan (@LarryHogan) April 27, 2015

His full statement reads:

ANNAPOLIS, MD – Governor Larry Hogan is closely monitoring the situation in Baltimore City and has been in contact with Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake office to provide the city with whatever resources are required. The Maryland State Police have been dispatched in a supporting role on the ground, as well as other resources and equipment from various state agencies. “Today’s looting and acts of violence in Baltimore will not be tolerated. In response, I have put the Maryland National Guard on alert so they can be in position to deploy rapidly as needed. I strongly condemn the actions of the offenders who are engaged in direct attacks against innocent civilians, businesses and law enforcement officers. There is a significant difference between protesting and violence and those committing these acts will be prosecuted under the fullest extent of the law. “My thoughts and prayers go out to the men and women in uniform who are actively working to stem this violence and several who been injured in the line of duty. These malicious attacks against law enforcement and local communities only betray the cause of peaceful citizens seeking answers and justice following the death of Freddie Gray.”

UPDATE: 6:24 PM: The Baltimore Orioles announced Monday evening that the riots forced them to postpone their game.

After consultation with Baltimore City Police Department, tonight’s game between the Orioles & White Sox at Oriole Park has been postponed. — Baltimore Orioles (@Orioles) April 27, 2015

An announcement regarding a make-up date will be made asap. Fans are encouraged to keep their tickets & parking until more info is available — Baltimore Orioles (@Orioles) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 6:10 PM: Torrey Smith, a wide receiver for the San Francisco 49ers, harshly criticized the teenage looters and rioters, condemning the violence they inflicted on the city.

It went from a peaceful protest to damn near a war which isn't going to do anything but delay progress — Torrey Smith (@TorreySmithWR) April 27, 2015

“@kiadk_: Shut up RT @TorreySmithWR: Baltimore this isn't the answer!!!”….nor is that cheap bundle in your head — Torrey Smith (@TorreySmithWR) April 27, 2015

Baltimore this isn't the answer!!! — Torrey Smith (@TorreySmithWR) April 27, 2015

People are stupid — Torrey Smith (@TorreySmithWR) April 26, 2015

To all of my brothers and sisters protesting in Baltimore. I applaud you for your effort in raising… https://t.co/HvLHKJFObN — Torrey Smith (@TorreySmithWR) April 26, 2015

UPDATE: 5:59 PM: Maryland State Police are sending reinforcements to Baltimore. Meanwhile, looters are ripping apart a cash-checking service.

Maryland State Police sending additional 40 troopers to #Baltimore, deploying tonight to join 42 troopers already assisting city PD. #CNN — Marlena Baldacci (@MarlenaCNN) April 27, 2015

Baltimore rioters now robbing a bank. Remind me what this is supposed to be about? #BlackLivesMatter #BaltimoreRiots pic.twitter.com/qhgMm7q6XM — Paul Joseph Watson (@PrisonPlanet) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 5:48 PM: The rioters have left enormous destruction in their wake, and some are posing in front of burning cars for pictures to send to friends.

Intersection of W North and Pennsylvania. Couple of stores have been hit. pic.twitter.com/BmNBRn6lTR — Joel D. Anderson (@byjoelanderson) April 27, 2015

Follow Peter for updates from Baltimore MT @phscoop Police van from transit authority on fire pic.twitter.com/R9gUhT4xqw — Washington Post (@washingtonpost) April 27, 2015

Ground shot: Car up in flames as group poses for pics in front of it. Appears to be civilian car. @cbsbaltimore pic.twitter.com/jMpGD4966u — Megan Viviano (@megganphone) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 5:43 PM: Riots and violent “flash mobs” are typically organized by black teenagers on social media and via texts. Low phone batteries appear to have discouraged the rioters.

Things have calmed down. Phones are dying. Back to the office. Community assn president: "they'll be back tonight." — Erica L. Green (@EricaLG) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 5:38 PM: President Obama and Attorney General Loretta Lynch have convened a meeting in the White House. Major Garrett of FOX News reports that all media are barred from the meeting — except for still photographers.

UPDATE: 5:35 PM: Under intense outrage and scrutiny, Mayor Rawlings-Blake backtracked from her initial comments of “we gave those who wished to destroy space to do that, as well” after riots broke out Saturday night. Here’s the full letter:

BALTIMORE, Md. (April 27, 2015)—Today, Howard Libit, Director of Strategic Planning and Policy, issued the following statement regarding Mayor Rawlings-Blake’s comments on the rights of protesters: “What she is saying within this statement was that there was an effort to give the peaceful demonstrators room to conduct their peaceful protests on Saturday. Unfortunately, as a result of providing the peaceful demonstrators with the space to share their message, that also meant that those seeking to incite violence also had the space to operate. The police sought to balance the rights of the peaceful demonstrators against the need to step in against those who were seeking to create violence. The mayor is not saying that she asked police to give space to people who sought to create violence. Any suggestion otherwise would be a misinterpretation of her statement.” This clarification is regarding comments made by Mayor Rawlings-Blake during a recent press conference. The mayor’s original quote follows (emphasis and clarification added): “I’ve made it very clear that I work with the police and instructed them to do everything that they could to make sure that the protesters were able to exercise their right to free speech. It’s a very delicate balancing act, because, while we tried to make sure that they were protected from the cars and the other things that were going on, we also [as a result] gave those who wished to destroy space to do that as well. And we worked very hard to keep that balance and to put ourselves in the best position to deescalate, and that’s what you saw.”

UPDATE: 5:31 PM: Police are begging parents of the high schools calling for anarchy, looting businesses and assaulting police officers to take them home and off the streets.

2/2: …we are asking for PARENTS to please bring your children home. We don't want to see anyone get hurt. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

1/2: We are asking for the MEDIA to assist us in relaying this message. Due to the large number of juveniles in these violent groups….. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

Several juveniles are part of these aggressive groups. WE ARE ASKING ALL PARENTS TO LOCATE THEIR CHILDREN AND BRING THEM HOME. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 5:27 PM: A CNN journalist was injured and taken to a hospital.

A @CNN Washington DC based video journalist was attacked and injured in the Baltimore riots and transported by an ambulance. — Nick Valencia (@CNNValencia) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 5:15 PM: The Rev. Al Sharpton plans to visit Baltimore on Monday to “push for answers” in the death of Freddie Gray. Sharpton also plans to organize a two-day march from Baltimore to Washington, D.C. From The Baltimore Sun:

Sharpton said the march from Baltimore to Washington is designed to call attention to Gray — as well as others before him, including Walter Scott, who was shot by a police officer in North Charleston, S.C. — to Loretta Lynch, the incoming U.S. attorney general. “Ms. Lynch, in her new role that we all supported, must look and intervene in these cases,” Sharpton said. “Justice delayed is justice denied.”

UPDATE: 5:08 PM: Baltimore Police Capt. Eric Kowalczyk vowed to investigate the “lawless individuals” who are rampaging through Baltimore and attacking police officers.

“Right now our focus is making sure that the people [who] live in that community are safe and that our officers are safe. You’re going to see tear gas, you’re going to see pepper balls,” Kowalczyk said. “We’re going to use appropriate methods to ensure that we’re able to preserve the safety of that community.”

UPDATE: 5:04 PM: Police has sustained broken bones after black Baltimore high schoolers calling for “The Purge” struck them with heavy bricks, rocks, and pipes. One officer is unconscious, non-responsive. The city’s transportation has been crippled by the raging violence and residents are urged by city officials to avoid several, out-of-control areas.

Police Captain just said 7 officers injured; some with broken bones, one is unresponsive. http://t.co/AimGSFmVtD pic.twitter.com/XcZ8ZnruTC — The Situation Room (@CNNSitRoom) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 4:57 PM: Rioters have set a police car ablaze. Another common feature of riots, looting, has begun. But Democratic Rep. Elijah Cummings maintains that the riots are “peaceful.”

A police car has been set on fire at North Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

A group is now looting a store in the area of North Ave and Pennsylvania Ave. Avoid the area. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

On Fox News live right now, what Elijah Cummings calls "peaceful protesters" lit cop car ON FIRE #BlackLivesMatter #riots — Matthew Boyle (@mboyle1) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 4:48 PM: Rioters are throwing pipes, chucks of concrete at police, and setting things on fire, according to a CNN reporter.

Some of the projectiles that were thrown at Baltimore Police pic.twitter.com/Z2HJr7EZKq — Athena Jones (@AthenaCNN) April 27, 2015

Protesters near h.s. in Baltimore set a trash can on fire. Smoke from what looked like smoke bombs blocked an intersection for a few moments — Athena Jones (@AthenaCNN) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 4:44 PM: Seven police officers have suffered injuries, according to reports.

BALTIMORE (AP) – Authorities say at least 7 officers have been injured in ongoing violent clash in Baltimore — Josh Lederman (@joshledermanAP) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 4:37 PM: Baltimore Police Capt. Eric Kowalczyk informed reporters that criminals responsible for damages and assault will be put in jail.

UPDATE: 4:34 PM: The rioters continue to tear apart everything in their path, including a photographer and now a police car.

A large group has surrounded a police car at North Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue. The group is destroying the police car — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

A photographer was just assaulted. Horrible to watch. — Erica L. Green (@EricaLG) April 27, 2015

UPDATE: 4:30 PM: The niece of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. blasted Mayor Rawlings-Blake for “inviting violence” into Baltimore in a letter obtained by Breitbart News.

Your invitation to “give space for those who want to destroy” is unbelievable. This interpretation of rights to free speech is dangerous Ma’am. In 1963, my father Rev. AD King, after the firebombing of our home in Birmingham, Alabama, urged hostile protestors to abandon violence and turn to God in prayer instead. Thank God they listened to him, and the even greater voice of his brother, my Uncle MLK, during those turbulent days. Now, you are inviting violence to your city? Who, Ma’am, will incur the moral and economic costs of picking up the pieces? The innocent taxpayers? We at www.restorethedream2015.com are very concerned. Ma’am, people are not entitled to pillage and destroy. That is just plain wrong. Our affiliates on the ground in Baltimore are willing to help quell the violent tide. And make no mistake about it; something must be done to save our cities. How did we get here? Where do we go now? Think about this: Baltimore 1965 vs. Baltimore 2015, compare and contrast: 1. Money spent on public schools then vs. now. 2. Amount spent on social welfare payments then vs. now. 3. The size of Government Bureaucracy then vs. now. 4. The number of black elected officials then vs. now. 5. Number of black children born in Baltimore to an intact nuclear family. 6. Number of Black lives MIA by abortion and incarceration. If you look at all six questions/comparisons what you will see is the only statistics to have decreased (1965 to 2015) is the number of black children born in intact nuclear families. Something is wrong. We must stop the killing and advance the healing now!

Several Baltimore police officers sustained injuries after black rioters, angry at the death of long-time drug dealer Freddie Gray, hurled bricks and other objects at them Monday afternoon.

The Mondawmin Mall and the University of Maryland closed down after fliers calling for “The Purge” circulated — while Baltimore high school students often circulate leaflets calling for the total suspension of law as a part of a gang initiation, businesses frightened by the latest plea for violent mayhem shut down hours ahead of the 3 p.m. riot.

The University of Maryland, Baltimore, posted a warning on its site, according to the Baltimore Sun:

“Due to reports from the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) concerning scheduled activities today beginning at 3 p.m., UMB will close today at 2 p.m. at the recommendation of the BPD. These activities may be potentially violent and UMB could be in the path of any violence. The safety of our students and employees is of paramount importance please vacate the campus as soon as possible.”

Several cops were injured by juvenile and adult rioters who hurled bricks at them.

Officer is down. Badly injured. pic.twitter.com/5lCOTJMS2a — Erica L. Green (@EricaLG) April 27, 2015

Additional officers have been injured in the area of Liberty Heights and Reisterstown Rd. The group continues to throw bricks at officers — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

Here at Mondawmin. Students everywhere. Police line. Officers are ducking bricks and bottles being thrown at them. Crazy. — Erica L. Green (@EricaLG) April 27, 2015

During a Saturday briefing, Baltimore Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake told the city her government allowed black rioters to smash police cars and terrorize residents.

“While we tried to make sure they were protected from the cars and the other things that were going on, we gave those who wished to destroy space to do that, as well,” she said.

Developing…

Email Katie at kmchugh@breitbart.com. Follow her on Twitter: @k_mcq.