Isis has claimed responsibility for the London terror attack through its Amaq 'news agency'.

A statement on the group's propaganda outlet said a “detachment” of its fighters had carried out the atrocity, in which seven people were killed and 48 were wounded.

One of their victims was Christine Archibald, a Canadian woman who is believed to have worked in a shelter for the homeless until she moved to Europe to be with her fiancé.

The three perpetrators, who have not yet been officially named, were shot dead at the scene by police just eight minutes after the first emergency call.

Amaq's statement quoted 'sources', a phrase usually used for attacks inspired, rather than directly commissioned, by Isis.

The group, which also claimed responsibility for the Manchester attack two weeks ago, has called on its followers to carry out increased terror attacks around the world during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.

Detailed instructions have been issued via propaganda magazines, videos and social media on how to launch mass casualty attacks using vehicles and knives.

Isis's calls for its supporters to take action have been tied to a series of attacks in Europe, including the Westminster attack in March and others in Stockholm, Berlin and Nice.

Analysts have warned that as Isis continues to lose swathes of territory in Iraq and Syria, it will increasingly turn to international terror attacks as a way of maintaining momentum.

Prior to the group's claim, The Independent’s Middle East correspondent Patrick Cockburn suggested the London attack was an attempt by Isis to prove it is still a major force following major losses in Iraq and Syria.

The slaughter of members of the public on Saturday night bears the group ’s hallmarks of working in a deliberately sadistic and attention-grabbing way, Mr Cockburn wrote in an analysis on Sunday.

Terrorism in 2016: Terror attacks in Europe claimed by Isis







9 show all Terrorism in 2016: Terror attacks in Europe claimed by Isis















1/9 Policemen outside Rouen's cathedral during the funeral of Jacques Hamel, the priest who was killed in a church in Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray in Normandy on 26 July during a hostage-taking claimed by Islamic State group Joel Saget/AFP/Getty Images

2/9 Two jihadists, both 19, slit Hamel's throat while he was celebrating mass in an attack that shocked France as well as the Catholic Church Joel Saget/AFP/Getty Images

3/9 Muslims place flowers and hold a minute of silence in front of the church if Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, western France, where French priest Jacques Hamel was killed on 26 July Charly Triballeau/AFP/Getty Images

4/9 Two people hold each other by the new makeshift memorial in Nice, in tribute to the victims of the deadly Bastille Day attack at the Promenade des Anglais Valery Hache/AFP/Getty Images

5/9 The Islamic State group claimed responsibility for the truck attack that killed 84 people in Nice on France's national holiday. Mohamed Lahouaiej-Bouhlel, 31, smashed a 19-tonne truck into a packed crowd of people in the Riviera city celebrating Bastille Day Valery Hache/AFP/Getty Images

6/9 Police work at a site where a Syrian migrant set off an explosive device in Ansbach, southern Germany, on 25 July, killing himself and wounding a dozen others Daniel Roland/AFP/Getty Images

7/9 A Syrian migrant set off an explosion at a bar in southern Germany that killed himself and wounded a dozen others in the third attack to hit Bavaria in a week. The 27-year-old, who had spent a stint in a psychiatric facility, had intended to target a music festival in the city of Ansbach but was turned away because he did not have a ticket Friebe/AFP/Getty Images

8/9 Police officers walk along train tracks in Wuerzburg southern Germany on 19 July, a day after a man attacked train passengers with an axe. German authorities said they had found a hand-painted IS flag among the belongings of the man, an asylum seeker from Afghanistan, who seriously injured four members of a family of tourists from Hong Kong in his rampage Daniel Roland/AFP/Getty Images

9/9 German police killed a teenage assailant after he attacked passengers on a train in Wuerzburg, southerg Germany with an axe and a knife on 18 July, seriously wounding three people Karl-Josef Hildenbrand/AFP/Getty Images

He added that the killings were probably triggered by a pre-arranged instruction to a cell or individual in Britain, with the order coming from within the Isis apparatus.

Isis has lost most of Mosul in Iraq – the centre of the self-declared Caliphate since Isis captured the city in 2014 – which Iraqi security forces have been assaulting for seven months.

Militants are currently battling to hold the final Isis-controlled districts of the city, while an advance on its largest remaining stronghold of Raqqa in Syria is expected to start this summer.