(Picture: AFP/Getty Images)

A van ploughed into pedestrians enjoying a night out in London Bridge, before attackers went from bar to bar stabbing people around Borough Market.

The horrific, brutal attack was been officially declared a terrorist incident.

Eight people were killed and 48 seriously injured in the attack. Out of those, 21 are in a critical condition.

Here is everything we know so far.

What happened

The emergency services were first called to reports of a white van driving into several people on London Bridge at 10.08pm on Saturday.

The entire area and nearby railway stations were closed, including London Bridge.

Witnesses reported seeing the van driving at around 50mph, mounting the pavement and swerving into a number of people.

Holly Jones, a BBC reporter who was on the bridge at the time, said: 'A white van driver came speeding - probably about 50mph - veered off into the crowds of people who were walking along the pavement.

'He swerved right round me and then hit about five or six people.'

(Picture: PA)

(Picture: Google)

(Picture: AFP/Getty Images)

(Picture: Reuters)

The van, which had been driving from north of the river, then drove towards Borough Market - which was especially busy because it was Saturday night.

When it arrived, the suspects stabbed several people in a crowded area. They then went from bar to bar, attacking people with 12-inch hunting knives.

Shots were then heard in the area, which was later confirmed to have been police officers shooting the suspects dead.

(Picture: PA)

Met Police later confirmed that seven people had died and at least 48 were hospitalised. In addition, the three suspected attackers were shot dead - within eight minutes of first responders arriving on the scene.

Two police officers were seriously injured in the attack - one Met officer, and another from the British Transport Police. One of the officers, who was first on the scene of the attack, took on the three armed terrorists with nothing but his baton.

A third police unit was sent to the Vauxhall area after reports of a stabbing, but this was later confirmed to not be connected to the attacks in London Bridge and Borough Market.

Victims

Eight people died in the attack.

London Ambulance Service said it had taken at least 48 injured people to five different London hospitals, while those described as 'walking wounded' were treated at the Andaz Hotel near Liverpool Street, where there were paramedics and more armed officers. Later, it was confirmed that 21 people were in a critical condition.

A British Transport Police officer who was left 'seriously injured' was reportedly stabbed in the face, head, and leg.

Police boats searched the River Thames for anyone who may have fallen from the bridge during the attack.

Canadian national Chrissy Archibald was the first victim confirmed as having tragically passed away in the attack.

Businessman James McMullan was also confirmed dead, after his bank card was found by police on one of the bodies.

Xavier Thomas, 45, was thrown into the Thames by the rented van.

Australian nanny Sara Zelenak was confirmed dead after she was missing for several days.

Ignacio Echeverria, 39, was killed trying to fight the terrorists using his skateboard.

French national Alexandre Pigeard, 27, was stabbed while working as a waiter at Boro Bistro.

Kirsty Boden, a 28-year-old nurse from Australia, was killed 'as she ran towards danger' trying to help.

Sebastien Belanger, a French chef, is also thought to have died in the attack.

Who can you call if you're concerned about loved ones

Anyone concerned about friends or relatives can call the Met Police's Casualty Bureau, which remains open.

Call 0800 096 1233 and 020 7158 0197.

The attackers

(Picture: AFP/Getty Images)

The three attackers, Khuram Butt, Yousef Zaghba and Rachid Redouane, were shot dead by police.

Police said the men were shot within eight minutes of officers receiving the first reports of the attack.

Witnesses described seeing them getting out of the van after it crashed just south of London Bridge.

A photographer at the scene, outside the Wheatsheaf pub, took a photo of one of the suspects wearing a vest with canisters strapped to themselves. The vests later turned out to be fake.

The person who took the photo said he then saw the attackers being shot by police.

On Sunday afternoon, police raided a property in Barking. They made 12 arrests in connection to Saturday night's attack - six men and six women.

However, all were released without charge.

What's happening now

(Picture: Getty Images)

The investigation

The ongoing investigation is being led by the Counter Terrorism Command.

Police say they believe they've caught all of the attackers, which is why the country's terrorism threat level was not raised to 'critical', as it was in the wake of the Manchester atrocity.

What the Met Police said

In a statement released on Sunday night at 10pm, the Met Police's Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley said: 'We would like to thank the media for their continued support, restraint and understanding in not speculating as to who the suspects are in this fast moving investigation.

'I would like to assure them and the public that this is directly assisting the progression of the investigation and confirm we will release the identities of the three men directly responsible for the attacks yesterday, Saturday, 3 June, as soon as operationally possible.

'Officers have been working tirelessly to process the crime scenes and release the cordons. We are hopeful that some of the cordons around London Bridge station will be released during the course of tomorrow morning but consult TFL website before you set out on your journey’s into and around London tomorrow.

'The public can expect to see additional police – both armed and unarmed officers - across the Capital as you would expect in these circumstances. And our security and policing plans for events are being reviewed, the public will also see increased physical measures on London’s bridges to keep the public safe.'

Transport

(Picture: PA)

After the attack London Bridge, Borough, Waterloo East, Charing Cross and Cannon Street stations were all completely closed.

However, Borough station reopened on Sunday evening, and all other stations reopened on Monday morning.

The Thames was briefly closed, but reopened to boats on Sunday morning.

Hospitals

Guy's Hospital, which is in the London Bridge area, was placed on lockdown as a precaution to keep staff and patients safe. St Thomas' and the Evelina Children's Hospital a mile away were also put on lockdown. This has however now been lifted.

SaveSave