Mark, another witness, was in the centre of London Bridge, taking pictures of Tower Bridge downstream.

A white van has been reported to have deliberately swerved into a crowd of pedestrians on London Bridge.

At least nine people were killed in the van attack on London bridge and a knife rampage by three men in nearby Borough Market.

Only hours before, bursts of gunfire echoed through the streets - likely from armed police - and at least three blasts rang out as officers performed controlled explosions.

He said a lot of police suddenly came from the other direction.

The Metropolitan Police confirmed there would be "additional police and officers deployed across the capital" in the forthcoming days.

Alex Shellum, who was in The Mudlark pub, close to London Bridge, said he saw a bleeding woman in her early 20s stagger in.

"This was a deliberate and cowardly attack on innocent Londoners and visitors to our city enjoying their Saturday night", he said.

They joined the Conservative Party in halting campaigning ahead of the June 8 vote. So far, 18 people have been arrested in connection with the May 22 attack.

British parliamentary elections are scheduled to be held Thursday.

US President Donald Trump has underscored his controversial travel ban on citizens from six Muslim-majority countries in view of today's terror attacks in central London in which six people were killed and 20 others injured.

Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy wrote in Spanish on his Twitter account: "I am following with great concern the attacks in London, sad news".

British and world leaders reacted with a combination of outrage and solidarity. Investigators later described the lone-wolf attack as "Islamist related terrorism". About 90 minutes later, police evacuated the restaurant, he said.

"Within my line of sight, there were five or six people on the ground that were not moving", he said.

It was not immediately disclosed if the six people killed were pedestrians at the bridge or restaurant patrons at the market.

The attacks were declared as "terrorist incidents" at 12:25am Sunday (2325 GMT Saturday). "The United States stands ready to provide any assistance authorities in the United Kingdom may request", she said.

"We thought maybe there was a fight or something outside".

It was the third attack to hit Britain in as many months.

Trump also spoke with British Prime Minister Theresa May to offer condolences and offered Washington's "full support" in investigating and bringing the perpetrators to justice, the White House said in a statement.

Armed police opened fire during two "terrorist incidents" at London Bridge and nearby Borough Market, a popular nightspot teeming with bars on a warm summer evening. The administration argues that the United States will be safer if the policy is put in place. "Thank you to the emergency services". To the people of Britain: "you are in our thoughts and prayers", Ontario Premier Kathleen Wynne tweeted.

Per BBC, May will "chair the government's emergency committee COBRA on Sunday morning".

"A van came from London Bridge itself, went between the traffic light system and rammed it towards the steps", a taxi driver told the BBC.

Ben said: "We saw people running away and then I saw a man in red with a large blade, at a guess 10 inches (25 centimetres) long, stabbing a man, about three times".

More than 30 casualties were rushed to hospitals in the area, according to the London Ambulance Service.