ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

Huge queues formed on Blackfriars Bridge this morning as cyclists were forced into single file while passing through anti-terror barriers installed after terror attacks on the capital.

Commuters have complained that the new safety precaution is causing congestion in the area while cyclists battle to “squeeze” through them.

Londoners were pictured crossing the bridge, which is on the route of Cycle Superhighway 6, with the sturdy new structures in place on their way to work this week.

The barriers were installed to protect pedestrians from car ramming following two terror attacks on the capital, but campaigners have since raised safety concerns.

Safety campaigners spoke of “serious safety concerns” amid the increased security measures.

Footage from the bridge shows cyclists being forced to slow down completely before entering the barriers in single file as they made their way to work.

Pictures from the scene appear to show TfL officials manning the installation as commuters pass over River Thames crossing this week.

Campaigners say that, while they recognise the importance of the barriers, they need to be “properly” installed.

Commuters took to social media to vent their outrage about the barriers they feel are too close together.

One witness wrote on Twitter: “Security barriers on Blackfriars. Good idea. But they've made bus lane unusable + bike highway and footway way over capacity. Needs review.”

They added: “Four traffic officials needed to man new security barriers on the cycle highway over Blackfriars. [People] are going to get hurt when it's busier.”

Posting a video of the chaotic scenes, another wrote: “@SadiqKhan & @TfL Please can the #barriers on #blackfriars-bridge be wider apart. I appreciate they need to be close but #notthisclose.”

A spokesman for London Cycling Campaign spoke of the “real safety risk” as he said cyclists were being forced into “often quite fast traffic” as a result of the barriers.

He told the Standard: “These barriers had to go up very fast indeed. We hope that something can be done to modify or change them to provide security and not make things worse for cyclists.”

A TfL spokesperson said: “The Met has installed barriers to increase security on London’s busiest bridges.

“We are working with them to ensure that these barriers affect cyclists and pedestrians as little as possible, while ensuring the security of all road users.”

The Metropolitan Police has been approached for comment.

Police, TfL, and council officials have faced serious questions over why barriers were not installed immediately after the terror attack in Westminster.

Khalid Masood killed four pedestrians and injured about 50 others on March 22 as he ploughed into people in a grey Hyundai while they walked on Westminster Bridge.

On June 3, London saw another vehicle-knife attack that left seven dead and 21 in critical conditions after a white van swerved down the wrong side of London Bridge, mowing down terrified pedestrians before the three attackers began stabbing passersby.