Moroccan-Libyan Rachid Redouane thought to have been identified from Irish police immigration bureau card found on his body

The second London Bridge attacker was a Moroccan-Libyan pastry chef who had until recently been living in Dublin, according to Irish police sources.

Rachid Redouane is thought to have settled in the Irish capital about five years ago but does not appear to have come to the authorities’ notice before Saturday night’s terror attack.

He is thought to have been identified from a card that was found on his body that had been issued by the Garda National Immigration Bureau in Dublin.

Redouane, 30, who had used the pseudonym Rachid Elkhdar, had also spent time living in a tower block in Dagenham in east London, not far from the home in Barking of his fellow attacker Khuram Butt.

Among those arrested in London on Sunday were Charisse O’Leary, 38, the mother of Redouane’s 18-month-old daughter. She was reportedly arrested at a temporary accommodation centre near Barking train station, half a mile from Butt’s apartment.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Charisse O’Leary. Photograph: Facebook

O’Leary, a London-born care worker, also goes by the name Charisse Redouane. The couple married in Ireland in 2012, but O’Leary never converted to her husband’s faith and they recently split up, with one woman who knew the couple saying there had been disagreements about the best way to raise their daughter. In recent posts on social media, O’Leary has described herself as single and, in one post, complained that her daughter’s father was not visiting their child.

In Dublin, police sources said Rachid Redouane had been living in Rathmines in the south of the capital and appeared to have spent time there as recently as three months ago.

The taoiseach, Enda Kenny, on a trade mission to Chicago, said the dead terrorist was not thought to have been under surveillance by Irish police. “There are a small number of people in Ireland who are being monitored and observed in respect of radicalisation and matters relevant to that,” Kenny said. “In this case, these facts are being checked, but my understanding is that this individual was not a member of that small group.”

The head of the Garda Síochána, the Irish police, Commissioner Nóirín O’Sullivan, chaired a conference in Dublin on Monday to establish what was known about Redouane.



Security sources in Dublin said the Garda were closely monitoring up to 12 foreign nationals, mainly of north African origin, over suspected links to extremist groups.

Meanwhile, a Muslim imam and scholar based in Ireland claimed his warnings to the Irish authorities about Isis and al-Qaida activists based in Dublin had been repeatedly ignored.

Shaykh Dr Umar al-Qadri told the Guardian on Monday that no one from either the police or the Republic’s justice department contacted him over his claims about the Islamist extremist presence in the Irish capital.

He said: “Two years ago, I spoke at an anti-radicalisation, anti-extremist conference in the EU headquarters in Brussels. I was quite explicit about there being a problem with Ireland, that extremists were using the country as a base to launch attacks elsewhere.”

Despite that public warning and private conversations with individual gardai, no one either in the force’s senior command or officials from the Irish government contacted him to glean more information, he added.