Train station to reopen on Monday morning for exiting passengers only, as roads near site of terror attack remain closed

Commuters going into London could face disruption to their journeys on Monday morning as roads near London Bridge remain closed following Saturday’s attack while police carry out forensic investigations and train stations begin to open.

London Bridge station would open on Monday morning, Network Rail announced, although it would be exit only and disruptions should be expected.

A statement said: “The station will be much busier than usual and there may be queuing systems in place. Passengers are advised to avoid London Bridge station during Monday’s morning peak if at all possible.”

Network Rail (@networkrail) #LondonBridge station will reopen tomorrow from 5am as exit only. More information here - https://t.co/mR955DixTy pic.twitter.com/v8LCRwnXu5

Met police assistant commissioner Mark Rowley earlier said the cordon around London Bridge station would “have an impact on travel arrangements” on Monday morning, and advised passengers to check with train and travel operators.

Borough station was reopened on Sunday evening, TFL announced via their Twitter account.

TfL Rail (@TfLRail) #Borough - the station has now reopened, following an earlier police investigation.

Commuters are advised to check the National Rail Enquiries website and Transport for London (TfL) travel alerts on Twitter before travelling.



A spokeswoman for TfL said: “There are station and road closures in place, some cycle and bus routes are affected and there may be some other changes to our services. People can stay up to date through our website by clicking on the yellow banner or by following our Twitter account.”

London Bridge station is an important London gateway for more than 50,000 passengers a day travelling from Surrey, Sussex and Kent.

On Sunday, Southeastern trains were passing through but not stopping at the station, continuing through to Waterloo East, Charing Cross and Cannon Street stations. Services that usually terminate at London Bridge are stopping at South Bermondsey or New Cross Gate.

A spokesman for Southeastern said: “London Bridge station will remain closed until at least the end of service today, and it is possible that services will continue to be affected tomorrow, Monday 5 June. Train services may have fewer coaches than usual and short notice alterations may take place as trains will not be in their normal positions in time to start their journey.”

Southern trains to and from East Croydon and Beckenham, which usually run to and from London Bridge, were terminating at South Bermondsey, and services to and from Tonbridge, Horsham and Caterham will terminate at New Cross Gate. Shuttle buses operated between New Cross Gate, South Bermondsey, Surrey Quays and Canada Water.

On the underground, Jubilee and Northern line trains were running as normal but not stopping at London Bridge station. Buses heading across London Bridge and in nearby streets were diverted. TfL is advising passengers to check its website for the diversions before starting to travel.

The British Transport police also warned of an increased police presence. A statement read: “You should expect to see more police officers patrolling stations in London and the south-east following last night’s attacks ... You may also see some of our armed police officers at stations. Please don’t be alarmed by this, it doesn’t mean there is any specific intelligence relating to the railway, or that there is an increased risk if you are travelling by train or tube. Our officers are there to make sure you feel safe and know that we are there to protect you.”