Large concrete barriers have been installed overnight at Waterloo, Lambeth and Westminster bridges.

Police have also been guarding the capital's main bridges in order to stave off any potential "copycat" attacks.

:: LIVE: Irish ID card found on one London attacker

Image: The sturdy concrete structures stand at both ends of the bridge

The increased measures to protect the public come just 24 hours after seven people were killed and 48 injured in a terror attack in London Bridge and Borough Market.

The white van used in the attack was able to reach speeds of more that 50mph before it was driven into victims on the bridge.

:: What we know about London Bridge killers

:: Corbyn calls for May to quit over police cuts

The three male attackers then jumped out of the vehicle and stabbed people with foot-long knives.

It has been reported that London's municipal governing body, City of London Corporation (COLC), ruled out installing anti-terror bollards in the London Bridge area just 24 hours before the attack.

Video: Timeline: How terror unfolded in Central London

After the Westminster Bridge terrorist atrocity in March, which killed five and left more than 50 injured, security barriers were installed outside Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle.

Following Saturday's rampage, Metropolitan Police commissioner Cressida Dick has increased patrols on London's streets, including armed officers.

Video: Met Commissioner: We face a 'changing threat'

Appealing to Londoners and visitors "to remain calm, be very vigilant", she said where possible "people should carry on with their normal lives".

:: First victim of London terror attack named

:: 'Bangs and gunshots' as terror police swoop

London hospitals have also increased security, with patients attending Guy's or St Thomas' hospitals asked to bring photo ID with them to appointments.

Video: New footage of London Bridge attacks

Although the capital was striving to return to normal on Monday morning, commuters going back to work faced some delays, with cordons remaining in place around the scene of the attack.

London Bridge itself reopened in a limited capacity on Monday morning, for exit-only traffic, while parts of Borough High Street and Borough Market remained closed, as well as Montague Close and Stoney Street.

:: Fans out in force for Manchester tribute gig

London Bridge Underground station returned to normal service, with all entrances and exits to in use, with the exception of Borough High Street.

The London Bridge mainline rail station was also open, but for exit only.

:: Anyone concerned about friends or relatives who may have been caught up in the attacks can call the police casualty bureau on 0800 096 1233 or 020 7158 0197.