All eight victims of the London Bridge and Borough Market terror attacks have been named.

They were killed on Saturday evening, when three assailants used a hire van to drive into pedestrians on London Bridge before launching a stabbing spree in a busy Borough Market.

Another 48 were injured, 10 of whom are in a critical condition.

Xavier Thomas

Police said on Wednesday they had recovered a body from the River Thames. The body has now been identified as Xavier Thomas, according to reports.

Thomas' girlfriend Christine Delcros was reportedly among those seriously injured. She underwent a two-hour operation on Tuesday to reset her pelvis, according to the Telegraph.

Ignacio Echeverría, 39

HSBC executive Ignacio Echeverría was confirmed dead by his sister, according to Sky News.

Friends and family had been appealing for information on Facebook. They said Echeverría defended a woman from an attacker with his skateboard.

The Spanish government released a statement on his death. It said:

"With great sadness and dismay, the government has received confirmation from the British authorities that Ignacio Echeverría is among the victims of the cruel terrorist attacks that took place in London last Saturday.

"Ignacio Echeverría’s behaviour during the attacks was exemplary and offers us all a model of solidarity. His bravery in defending a defenceless person reminds us of the need to remain united against the scourge of terrorism, against those whose only language is violence and terror."

Sebastien Belanger, 36

Sebastien Belanger was a 36-year-old French national.

The chef, who has worked in bars and restaurants across London, was reportedly in Borough Market watching the Champions League final in the Barrow Boy and Banker pub. His friends and family confirmed his death.

Madlen Langmeyer wrote on Facebook: "There are no words to describe the sadness I feel. Such an amazing, decent and kind human."

Sara Zelenak, 21

Friends and family of Australian, Sara Zelenak, were told she was dead on Tuesday, according to The Guardian.

Her mother later confirmed the news in a Facebook post. She said: "Sara Zelenak is confirmed dead, they found her body and has DNA tests confirmed. Thank you for all the overwhelming love and support from everyone."

The 21-year-old from Brisbane was separated from her friends during the attack and has not been contactable since. She was the second Australian killed after news of Kirsty Boden's death was confirmed (see below).

Alexandre Pigeard, 27

French media named Alexandre Pigeard as the fourth person killed on Saturday. He was reportedly a waiter at Boro Bistro, at the epicentre of the attack in Borough Market.

Boro Bistro's manager Vincent Le Berre told Le Télégramme: "He immediately attacked a client who was killed. I managed to escape, but my friend Alexandre did not have a chance. He was stabbed in the neck with a knife."

Pigeard, who was from Colleville-Montgomery, reportedly took part in an anti-terror training course just two days before the attack and ushered 40 people to safety.

His family said: "One of the killers fatally stabbed him whilst he was working on the terrace of the restaurant where he had been an employee for nine months.

"Alexandre was a marvellous son, a perfect older brother and a radiant young man much loved by all who had the good fortune to meet him. All his friends praised his kindness, his good humour, and his generosity."

Kirsty Boden, 28

28-year-old Australian Kirsty Boden was the third victim named. The nurse was described as "the most outgoing, kind and generous person who loved to help people."

A statement issued on behalf of her family said: "As she ran towards danger, in an effort to help people on the bridge, Kirsty sadly lost her life."

"We are so proud of Kirsty’s brave actions which demonstrate how selfless, caring and heroic she was, not only on that night, but throughout all of her life. Kirsty — we love you and we will miss you dearly."

Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust in London confirmed that Boden worked at its hospitals, The Guardian said. It hailed her as "one in a million."

James McMullan, 32

Londoner James McMullan was named as the second victim of the attack by his sister Melissa McMullan. She read out a statement on Sky News, saying the 32-year-old's bank card was found on a body from Saturday night.

McMullan said her brother, who was drinking in the Barrowboy and Banker pub on the night of the attack, was an "inspiration" and "words will never be able to match his essence." She called the terrorists "deranged and deluded."

Chrissy Archibald, 30

Chrissy Archibald, a Canadian bride-to-be who volunteered at a homeless shelter, was the first victim named.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau first confirmed that a Canadian national had been killed in the attack on Sunday and Archibald was later named by local press.

"We grieve the loss of our beautiful, loving daughter and sister. She had room in her heart for everyone and believed strongly that every person was to be valued and respected," Archibald's family said in a statement. They added that she "would have had no understanding of the callous cruelty that caused her death."