Prime minister says ‘we have very real concerns’ about two more, bringing the total four, as more details emerge of stabbings

There are “very real concerns” about two more Australian who may have been caught up in the London Bridge terrorism attack, prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has said.

London Bridge attack: Islamic groups step up anti-terror efforts in UK – live updates Read more

Two Australians – Candice Hedge and Andrew Morrison – are already known to have been injured in the attacks on Saturday night.

Turnbull said on Monday: “There are two other Australians, so that brings it to a total of four, about whom we have very real concerns, but at this stage we’re not able to say anything more.”

After UK prime minister Theresa May suggested there was far too much tolerance of extremism, Turnbull raised the issue and said “five-eyes” countries were working to get social media companies to take a more responsible approach.

“There is too much tolerance of extremist material on social media and that ultimately requires cooperation from the big social media platforms,in particular, Facebook and Twitter,” Turnbull said.

“They are headquartered in the United States and it is one of the priorities that we have – and our friends in the UK have – as we work as part of the five-eyes intelligence community, which of course, includes the United States, Canada and New Zealand as well, to get a more responsible approach taken to this type of material.”

On Monday morning, Julie Bishop said three Australians were believed to have been affected.

The foreign minister told ABC radio she had spoken to the father of Hedge, who is recovering in hospital, while Morrison, who received stitches, was on his way back home.

“We’re still making inquiries in respect to the circumstances of the third Australian,” Bishop said after speaking to the high commissioner in London, Alexander Downer.

Brisbane woman Hedge, 30, was badly wounded when she was slashed in the throat in Saturday’s deadly attack. She is recovering in St Thomas’s hospital in London.

She posted on Facebook: “Hey everyone, just so you know im doing ok. Bit of pain but I will survive. Thanks for your thoughts and well wishes.”

A witness to her attack said one of the terrorists had cut her throat while she was trying to hide under a table.

“The girl was bleeding massively, but she was conscious … there was a lot of blood, and it was clear on the neck, which was scary,” he told Channel Nine.

Hedge’s mother, Kim del Toro, told Fairfax Media her daughter had received emergency surgery but “she is going to be fine, thank goodness”.

She said Hedge had been at the bar with her boyfriend, Luke, when “he heard some commotion out the front and went out to see what was going on”.

“He saw some men with knives coming toward them, and he ran back inside to see where Candice was.”

She said he had been unable to find her, and the police had yelled for everyone to stay down. He had then seen his girlfriend running towards him, holding her bleeding neck.

Del Toro said her daughter had been able to make a Skype call on Sunday morning. “She couldn’t speak, but I got to see her and she gave me the thumbs up, so I knew that she was OK.”

Also injured was Andrew Morrison, from Darwin. In a video posted on Reddit, Morrison, who had a blood-stained cloth wrapped around his neck, said he had been stabbed after leaving Belushi’s bar in London Bridge where he had been watching the Champions League final.

“All of a sudden this guy comes up with a knife … I push him off. I walk into a pub and say, ‘Someone help me, I’ve been stabbed,’” he said on the video.

Morrison said he was reluctant to say it but said his attacker looked like “a Muslim terrorist”.

Morrison’s sister Katrina told the NT News the family was just happy he was safe.

“Yes, my brother was involved,” she said. “We’re currently sorting out his flight home.”

Play Video 2:12 How the London Bridge attacks unfolded – video report

Seven people were killed and 48 wounded when three men launched the attack just after 10pm on Saturday local time. Police shot the three terrorists dead within eight minutes of the violence erupting.

A New Zealander, Oliver Dowling, from Christchurch, was recovering from four hours of surgery after being stabbed in the face, neck and stomach.



His sister Freddy posted on Facebook, the New Zealand Herald reported: “Doctors are very happy with how he’s come out the other side. A massive thank to the University of London Hospital for their tireless efforts in helping my brother out!!”

The 32-year-old’s girlfriend, Marie Bondeville, was also injured, she wrote: “Marie has been in surgery at another hospital but unfortunately we haven’t been able to find out how she is due to not being immediate family.”

Outcry as Pauline Hanson turns UK police warning into anti-Islam meme Read more

After speaking to her UK counterpart, Boris Johnson, Bishop said the attack which began on London Bridge on Saturday was an example of the new reality.



“But we must never accept it,’ she said. “We both observed how this mindless savagery is striking into communities. It’s designed to shock, but the British are resolute in their determination to defeat Islamist terrorism.”

Asked about the response of Theresa May – who insisted “enough is enough” – Bishop said the British prime minister was expressing the views of the people she serves.

“The British people have been living with this for some time and I think prime minister May expressed the views of many British people,” she said. “Likewise in Australia, we will continue to do everything we can to keep Australians safe and to stamp out terrorism.”

The former prime minister Tony Abbott said it was time for specialist military commandos to lead major counter-terrorism operations in Australia, and repeated his call for police to be given more shoot-to-kill powers.

Abbott said he was “very, very pro the police” but he said there needed to be an appropriate understanding of “the Islamist mindset” and that jihadists had a “death to the infidel” approach.



He said it was appropriate that the police advised members of the public in London to run and hide during a terror event but he declared “we shouldn’t be societies that run and hide.”

Abbott said in Australia, there mustn’t be “the slightest hint of a surrender mindset” or a run and hide mindset.

“All too often in officialdom’s ranks there is this notion that Islamophobia is almost as big a problem as Islamist terrorism,” he said.



“Well, Islamophobia hasn’t killed anyone ... Islamist terrorism has now killed tens of thousands of people.”

Abbott, who put a commando regiment on standby during the December 2014 Lindt cafe siege, is one of several Liberal MPs pushing for the Defence Act to be amended.

But Turnbull said the view that police could not shoot to kill was “quite untrue” and there were already procedures to bring in specialist troops such as the SAS at the request of state governments under the constitution.

He said it was under active consideration in the review following the Lindt siege.

“The practice of cordon and contain, which had been used for many years, is not applied by police in situations where there is an active armed offender, an active shooter or someone with a knife, such as you saw in London.

“Australian police are presented with a situation as you saw in London would respond quickly to disable, to shoot in other words, the assailants, just as the police officers in London did.”