Ukip declines to follow suit as party leaders also express gratitude to police and emergency services for their professional response

The Conservatives, Labour and Liberal Democrats have suspended national election campaigning after the terrorist attack on London Bridge in which at least seven people were killed and the three attackers shot dead by police.

While local work such as leafleting would continue, the Conservatives said they have decided not to campaign nationally on Sunday, with the suspension to be reviewed during the day, and as more details emerged of the attack and its aftermath.

Labour said it had suspended its national campaign after consultation with other parties, with the election four days away. The Liberal Democrats said they had also suspended national campaigning, as did the Greens.

Ukip said it would not follow suit, with the party’s leader, Paul Nuttall, saying such an action would be “precisely what the extremists would want us to do”.

Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, said his party would resume campaigning on Sunday evening, saying to delay any longer would obstruct democracy.

He told Sky News: “We won’t be campaigning nationally during today, but we’ll be resuming later on. I think it’s important to give a message that democracy must prevail. If we allow these attacks to disrupt our democratic process then we will all lose.”

Play Video 1:16 Corbyn: 'dreadful attack' must not disrupt democratic process – video

The Brexit secretary, David Davis, said he thought the suspension would be “relatively brief” and he did not think the election could or should be suspended.

“I’m not sure it can be legally done,” he told the BBC. “In order to do this you’d need to have some change in the law, I think, and who’s going to do that? Parliament no longer exists.

“I think we’re locked into 8 June. I think the public want us to be locked into 8 June. There’s a balance of things here. On the one hand we clearly want to respect the people who have been injured and killed, we want to pay proper respect and therefore we don’t want to carry on across it.

“But on the other hand, the people doing this are doing this because they despise the freedoms we have – the freedom to go out on a Saturday night, and the freedom to cast a vote.”

It is the second terrorism-related suspension of the campaign – it stopped for three days after last month’s suicide bomb attack in Manchester, which killed 22 people.



On Sunday morning, the prime minister was in Whitehall to meet senior ministers and security chiefs in the government’s emergency Cobra committee.

May and Corbyn joined other politicians in expressing their horror and dismay at the attacks at London Bridge and Borough Market, as well as praising the emergency services for their response.

The prime minister released a brief statement shortly after the incident, in which a van was driven into people on the bridge before the attackers jumped out of the vehicle and stabbed others in nearby Borough Market.

May’s statement was issued before police announced that six people had died in the attack and officers had killed the attackers – she was expected to speak again after the Cobra meeting.

London attacks: incidents at London Bridge and Borough Market confirmed as terrorism – live Read more

“Following updates from police and security officials, I can confirm that the terrible incident in London is being treated as a potential act of terrorism,” the prime minister said.



“This is a fast-moving investigation. I want to express my huge gratitude to the police and emergency services who are on the scene. Our thoughts are with those who are caught up in these dreadful events.”

Corbyn said: “We are all shocked and horrified by the brutal attacks in London. My thoughts are with the families and friends of those who have died and the many who have been injured. Today, we will all grieve for their loss.

“I would like to thank the police and emergency services for their bravery and professionalism in acting to save lives and deal with these appalling acts of terrorism, as well as NHS staff and members of the public who sought to protect others.

“The Labour party will be suspending national campaigning until this evening, after consultations with other parties, as a mark of respect for those who have died and suffered injury.

“Those who wish to harm our people, divide our communities and attack our democracy will not succeed. We will stand together to defend our common values of solidarity, humanity and justice, and will not allow terrorists to derail our democratic process.”

The Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron, said: “My thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families, and I would like to pay tribute to the emergency services for their professional response in such terrible circumstances.

“The terrorists kill us because they hate us and what we stand for. They hate our democracy and our freedom. We refuse to let them win. We must respond with a vigorous commitment to our democracy.

“The election must go ahead as planned. It is right that we suspend our national campaigning for a short while out of respect for those affected by these tragic events, but local campaigning can and must continue. “The remainder of this campaign must be a collective showing of defiance and pride in our democratic values.”

In a statement saying Ukip would still campaign on Sunday, Nuttall said: “It is time to start honouring our dead with more than just words. The only guarantee that will come from our choosing to stall the democratic process again will be more attacks; it is what these cowards want us to do.

“For those of us seeking to serve the people of this country, it is our duty to drive the dialogue on how best to confront and defeat this brand of terrorism. That is what Ukip will be doing today and beyond. Therefore, I refuse to suspend campaigning because this is precisely what the extremists would want us to do.”



London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, said in a statement: “We don’t yet know the full details, but this was a deliberate and cowardly attack on innocent Londoners and visitors to our city enjoying their Saturday night. I condemn it in the strongest possible terms.”

The Scottish National party, Scottish Labour and the Scottish Liberal Democrat leaders cancelled national campaign events planned for Sunday.

Nicola Sturgeon was chairing a meeting of the Scottish government’s resilience committee, and said her officials were liaising closely with the UK government and Police Scotland.

She said: “Following the horrific terrorist attack in the centre of London last night, we are working closely with the UK government and Police Scotland to monitor the situation.

“My thoughts are with the families and friends of those who have tragically lost their lives and with everyone who has been harmed or affected by these terrible incidents.”

Jonathan Bartley, the Green party co-leader, said: “This was a brutal, barbaric attack and my heart goes out to all the victims and their families.

“The emergency services responded in an exemplary fashion and it is clear too that many others responded with selfless bravery and compassion to the awful events in London last night. I am sickened that terrorists have again attempted to divide us in such a cruel and crude fashion. They will not succeed.”