THE third London Bridge attacker has been identified as a Moroccan-Italian citizen as the family of South Australian Kirsty Boden confirm she is among the dead..

Kirsty Bowden, 28, of Loxton in South Australia’s Riverland graduated as a nurse from Flinders University in 2010 and has been living and working as a health professional in the UK.

In a statement released by London’s Metropolitan Police, her family said she was: “(the) most outgoing, kind and generous person who loved to help people.

media_camera Kirsty Boden in Basel, Switzerland, from her travel blog. Her family has confirmed she was killed in the London terror attacks . Pictures: Facebook

“Helping people was what she loved to do in her job as a nurse and in her daily life.

“As she ran towards danger, in an effort to help people on the bridge, Kirsty sadly lost her life.

MORE DETAILS: Australian Kirsty Boden killed in London Bridge attack

“We are so proud of Kirsty’s brave actions which demonstrate how selfless, caring and heroic she was, not only on that night, but throughout all of her life.

“Kirsty – we love you and we will miss you dearly.”

media_camera An undated handout picture released by the British Metropolitan Police Service shows Kirsty Boden, a victim of the June 3 terror attack on London Bridge. Picture: AFP / METROPOLITAN POLICE

Fears also surround the fate of missing Brisbane woman Sara Zelenak, who was last seen near the Borough Market as the attack unfolded.

The London Bridge attack left seven people dead and dozens wounded before police shot dead the three attackers, who wore fake suicide vests.

Italian authorities have also now identified the third attacker as Youssef Zaghba, who held joint Moroccan-Italian citizenship.

media_camera A man holds a Union flag as he kneels near flowers layed at Potters Fields Park in London during a vigil to commemorate the victims of the terror attack on London Bridge and at Borough Market that killed seven people. Picture: AFP / Daniel LEAL-OLIVAS

THIRD ATTACKER ‘KNOWN TO POLICE’

The third man suspected of carrying out the deadly attack in central London was an Italian-Morrocan who was arrested last year on suspicion of trying to reach Syria.

Italy’s main newspapers named the suspect as Youssef Zaghba, 22, the son of an Italian mother, from Bologna, and a Moroccan father, who had passports from both countries.

British police have confirmed the identity of two of the three attackers but had been retaining the name of the third while investigations into possible accomplices and contacts continued.

The Italian reports said Zaghba was intercepted at Bologna airport last year as he was about to board a plane for Turkey, with the apparent intention of joining Islamic State militants fighting in Syria.

Police reportedly found Islamic State propoganda videos on his cell phone but, after an investigation, failed to find sufficient evidence of links to terrorism to prosecute him and he was released.

According to the reports, Zaghba’s status as a potential militant was notified to the British and Moroccan secret services.

A London police spokesman said: “We haven’t released anything at the moment, nor are we confirming anything but as soon as we are ready to name him, it will be on our website. We’re hoping to get that out soon.”

media_camera Khuram Shazad Butt, left, Rachid Redouane and Youssef Zaghba have been named by police the three attackers in the June 3 terror attack on London Bridge. Picture: AFP/Metropolitan Police

KILLERS’ DETAILS EMERGE

London Bridge terrorist Rachid Redouane said a secret goodbye to his 17-month-old daughter in the hours leading up to the terrorist attack.

According to the Mirror Redouane, who police have identified alongside Khuram Shazad Butt, as two of the three attackers, visited his daughter Amina shortly before the atrocity at the London flat of his estranged wife.

According to the publication, Redouane, 30, who claimed to be Moroccan and Libyan, signed the visitor’s register at the flat just before 7pm.

Three hours later Redouane, who also also went by the name Rachid Elkhdar, and two other terrorists launched their attack.

Butt, 27, a British citizen born in Pakistan, was married with children and lived in Barking, East London for a number of years, BBC reports.

Scotland Yard said he was known to police and MI5 but there was no intelligence to suggest an attack.

According to a New York Times report, Butt’s wife gave birth just two weeks ago.

Redouane.

Both men lived in the same area of east London.

RELATED: How to fight back against a terrorist

Police said they were still working to establish the identity of the third attacker.

Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley said: “There was no intelligence to suggest that this attack was being planned and the investigation had been prioritised accordingly. Work is ongoing to understand more about them, their connections and whether they were assisted or supported by anyone else.”

Butt, Redouane and one other man were shot dead by police after killing seven people and injuring 48 when they drove a hired van into pedestrians on London Bridge before stabbing people around Borough Market on Saturday night.

According the New York Times a neighbour of Butt said the terrorist lived with his wife and young children in the Elizabeth Fry Apartments on Kings Road in Barking, including a newborn.

“His wife just gave birth, the baby was two weeks old,” said Nasser Ali.

Another neighbour described Butt as dressing in the dress of a conservative Muslim, wearing a gown over a tracksuit and sneakers.

That account came as NBC reported the bystander shot in the head by a stray bullet from police is an American. The person is expected to survive.

SECOND VICTIM NAMED

James McMullan, 32, from Hackney in East London has been named as the second victim of the attack

McMullan’s devastated sister Melissa paid a heartbreaking tribute to her “inspirational” brother, telling Sky News: “Words will never be able to match his essence.”

“Nowhere else will you find such humour and unique personality.”

James was last seen at the Barrowboy and Banker pub on Borough High Street shortly before the attack at 10.08pm, The Sun reported.

media_camera James McMullan has been named as the second person killed in the attack. Picture: PA via AP

He had stepped outside for a cigarette and had agreed to meet pals outside when they finished their drinks. His friends were rushed upstairs to safety when the attack began but James is thought to have been killed by the trio of fanatics outside.

James was working on a web-based business to “revolutionise education”, according to his father Simon, 61.

The first victim was named as Christine “Chrissy” Archibald, who died in her fiancé’s arms as she was struck by the killers on the bridge.

BUTT WAS KNOWN TO POLICE

Butt, a known Islamist who had been reported to police several times for his extremist views, was known as “Abz”.

He was apparently radicalised by watching YouTube videos of the Arab-American hate preacher Ahmad Musa Jibril.

Neighbours recognised Abz, a former employee on the London Underground train network, after they saw photographs of him dying in the street, wearing a fake explosive vest.

He was featured in a recent documentary on the British Channel 4 from 2016 called The Jihadist Next Door.

A friend told BBC’s Asian Network that he had phoned the anti-terror hotline about Abz.

“He used to listen to a lot of Musa Jibril (notorious US hate preacher Ahmad Musa Jibril). I have heard some of this stuff and it’s very radical,’’ the neighbour said.

“I phoned the anti-terror hotline. I spoke to the gentleman. I told him about our conversation and why I think he was radicalised.”

media_camera London Bridge jihadist Butt was interviewed in a TV documentary The Jihadist Next Door which was shown in the UK last year. Picture: Channel 4

media_camera Butt was pictured as part of a group in Regent’s Park.

The neighbour said Abz was not arrested and was allowed to keep his passport.

“I did my bit, I know a lot of other people did their bit, but the authorities did not do their bit.”

Another neighbour, Erica Gasparri, told the British media she had taken photos of Abz and provided them to police two years after he told her he was “ready to do whatever I need to do in the name of Allah’’ when she confronted him about trying to convert children in a local park to Islam.

Abz had previously appeared in a TV documentary about jihadism and was spoken to by police after an IS flag was unfurled, on camera, in a park.

The three jihadists, wearing fake suicide bomb vests, were shot dead by police eight minutes after receiving a call for help.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack, the third in the UK in less than three months, saying through its Amaq propaganda outlet it had been carried out by one of its “sleeper cells.’’

“A security unit of Islamic State fighters carried out the London attacks yesterday,” it said.

Chilling moment London Bridge attackers enter Borough Market

VIDEO EMERGES OF POLICE SHOOTING TERRORISTS

New video shows the moment three terrorists were gunned down by police.

The footage, obtained by Sky News, was shot inside Borough Market.

In the video, gunshots can be heard ringing out before panicking pubgoers sprint past, The Sun reports.

The man’s voiceover can be heard over the footage saying: “I’m direct from a terrorist attack in the middle of London. I just saw two guys getting shot. There’s another gunfire. I have no idea what’s going on, I can’t see from here.”

A police officer then runs past and shouts “you need to move” before pubgoers begin sprinting past.

media_camera New video reveals the moment the London Bridge attackers were shot dead. Picture: Sky News

EMOTIONAL VIGIL

London’s mayor has led a heart-rending vigil in the capital in honour of those killed and hurt in the barbaric terror attack at the weekend.

Sadiq Khan condemned Saturday night’s events and vowed the terrorists “will not win” during the ceremony at Potters Field Park, near London Bridge, at 6pm Monday local time.

“As a proud and patriotic British Muslim your perverse ideology has nothing to do with the true values of Islam and you will never divide our city.”

He also thanked emergency services who were there on the night when terror struck, and the “brave Londoners” who ran toward the danger to save others.

Crowds assembled at Potters Fields for a vigil, paying tribute to the victims of the #London attacks in #LondonBridge and #BoroughMarket pic.twitter.com/mWMMoy0hfI — Metropolitan Police (@metpoliceuk) June 5, 2017

TRUMP TAKES ANOTHER JAB AT LONDON MAYOR

US President Donald Trump has taken another jab at Sadiq Khan over his reaction to the attacks.

Mr Trump accused Mr Khan of making a “pathetic excuse” over one of his comments in the wake of the attack that killed seven people in London.

media_camera US President Donald Trump has renewed his criticism of London Mayor Sadiq Khan. Picture: AFP

Mr Khan had said in one of his first statements in reaction to the attack that people would see an increased police presence on the streets of the capital and should not be alarmed by that.

“Pathetic excuse by London Mayor Sadiq Khan who had to think fast on his ‘no reason to be alarmed’ statement. MSM is working hard to sell it!” Mr Trump said in a tweet on Monday. MSM referred to mainstream media.

Mr Trump had faced a barrage of criticism on Sunday over an earlier Tweet attacking Mr Khan.

A spokesman for Mr Khan, responding to Trump’s latest tweet, said: “Nothing has changed since yesterday.

“The mayor is focused on dealing with Saturday’s horrific and cowardly attack and working with the police, the emergency services and the Government to keep London safe.”

Pathetic excuse by London Mayor Sadiq Khan who had to think fast on his "no reason to be alarmed" statement. MSM is working hard to sell it! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 5, 2017

MAY UNDER PRESSURE OVER POLICE CUTS

The revelations that at least one of the attackers was known to authorities will heap further pressure on Britain’s security forces, which has already confirmed the perpetrators of the two previous terror attacks were known to them before they launched their deadly attacks.

It will also raise difficult questions for Prime Minister Theresa May, a former Home Secretary for six years with responsibility for police resourcing, with the UK general election on Thursday.

It was revealed last month that UK spy agency MI5 had identified 23,000 “subjects of interest’’ living in the UK, of which 3000 were being looked at as part of 500 active investigations.

media_camera Britain's Prime Minister and Conservative Party leader Theresa May during a general election campaign speech in London. Picture: Odd Andersen

AUSSIES AMONG VICTIMS

As 36 of the London Bridge victims remained in hospital last night, it was revealed 21 of them were fighting for their lives.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull confirmed four Australians were caught up in the attack.

Andrew Morrison and Candice Hedge were stabbed in the neck but survived, while Mr Turnbull revealed “very real concerns’’ 21-year-old Sara Zelenak, from Brisbane, who was last seen on London Bridge.

“She got separated from her friends and has not been seen since. Her phone has rang with no reply and now the battery must have gone,” a now-deleted Facebook post by family friend Diane Winter said.

media_camera Missing Aussie woman Sara Zelenak was last seen on London Bridge before the terror attacks. Picture: Supplied

Canadian woman Christine Archibald was the first victim identified, with her family mourning their “beautiful’’ daughter and sister, who died in the arms of her fiance Tyler Ferguson after she was run down by the terrorists’ van on London Bridge.

Ferguson’s brother Mark told British Columbia TV station CBC that the pair were based in Den Haag in the Netherlands, where Tyler works as an accountant. Work had taken him to London for a week and Ms Archibald decided to join him for the weekend.

A Spanish man is still missing after he used his skateboard against one of the jihadists, who was stabbing a woman, Spanish media report.

Joaquin Echevarria, father of Ignacio Echevarria, 39, told EFE that UK police had asked for a copy of his son’s fingerprints in order to see if he was among the unidentified victims who are in hospital, as he was listed neither as injured nor dead.

Ignacio, originally from the town of Las Rozas near Madrid, was last seen on London Bridge on Saturday night.

media_camera Ignacio Echevarria, 39, is missing after attacking the jihadists with a skateboard. Picture: Supplied

His family said he was riding his bike back from skateboarding at the park with friends when he saw one of the assailants rushing towards a woman.

“At that moment he launched himself towards the attacker and hit him with a skateboard while the other two injured him from behind and he was left lying on the floor,” they said.

A 27-year-old Frenchman, identified only as Alexandre, from Saint-Malo in Brittany, was also reported to have died after being stabbed at the Boro Bistro where he worked on Borough High Street.

“The bar was packed. A terrorist arrived and jumped from above onto a parasol on the terrace, injuring one of my colleagues,” said Vincent Le Berre, the bistro’s manager, according to the account his mother gave newspaper Le Télégramme in his native Brittany.

“He immediately started attacking people. A woman customer was killed. I found myself face-to-face with the terrorist who was two metres from me. I saw the hatred in his eyes. I managed to escape but my friend Alexandre wasn’t so lucky. He was stabbed in the neck with a knife,” he said, according to Vincent’s mother, Marie-Jo Le Berre, who had spoken to her son on the phone.

An American bystander was shot in the head by police after they unloaded an “unprecedented 50 rounds” at the rampaging terrorists. The victim bled from the eyes after being hit

Fabio Lamas, who works at a pub in Borough Market, told NBC he saw “an American guy get shot in the head.”

Mr Lamos said: “He was bleeding through his eye. I went to get the first-aid kit and I started speaking to his friends and to try and calm them down.”

media_camera Brisbane women Candice Hedge was stabbed in the neck. Picture: Facebook media_camera Darwin man Andrew Morrison has been released from hospital after stabbing. Picture: Facebook

POLICE RAIDS

Police arrested 12 people after raids in Barking, in East London. Eleven people were detained at what is thought to be Abz’s flat, which he shared with his mother, his wife and two small children. They include six women aged 19-60.

A woman, 38, was arrested at another address in Barking after police blew the door off the flat, and a 55-year-old man was arrested but released without charge.

Police have also raided properties in East Ham and Newham. Last night, police said 11 people, seven women and four men, were still detained.

On Monday, police conducted another raid at nearby Caledon Road, with a neighbour telling AFP they had been “in a panic”.

“We were so scared and panicked we didn’t come out of the bedroom,” he said, while another said that three people had been taken away.

A third raid took place at a dirty yellow house in Barking on a major road into London next to warehouses, small workshops and a tyre shop. A police forensics officer was seen entering the house and a person with their head covered was seen being led away in a police van.

“They’ve been there for years,” Steve, who works in a tyre shop next door, told AFP. He declined to say how many people lived there or give any details about them. “They don’t bother us, we don’t bother them.”

Metropolitan Police Chief Commissioner Cressida Dick said last night police had been arresting “about one person a day’’ on terrorism offences.

media_camera A police officer lays flowers at a pedestrian crossing by Borough Market in London in tribute to the victims of the June 3 attacks. Picture: Justin Tallis