An off-duty police officer rugby tackled one of the London Bridge attackers as several police heroically tried to halt the attack before the arrival of armed colleagues.

The rugby-playing officer was stabbed as he attempted to overpower one of the attackers, the BBC reported.

Four police were among the dozens of people injured by the three terrorists, who killed seven people.

Attackers shouted 'this is for Allah' says London Bridge eyewitness

The off-duty officer was seriously hurt but was being treated in hospital where his condition was not believed to be life-threatening.

Another officer, who worked for the British Transport Police, was stabbed in the face, head and legs when he took on all three attackers with just his baton. He was is in a stable condition in hospital. Two more officers were hurt.

Members of the public also tried to fight back against the attackers.

Gerard Vowls told of how he threw glasses, bottles and chairs at the attackers after seeing them stab a woman in the street.

Police have said armed officers shot dead three suspects just eight minutes after the first emergency call.

Ken Marsh, chairman of the Metropolitan Police Federation, said: “Our thoughts are with the families of those who lost loved ones in the horrific events last night and we wish well to those still injured.

“There can be no doubt that the swift response of our colleagues – both armed and unarmed – saved further lives from being lost.

“There are barely words to describe their bravery – officers who ran towards danger with no thought for their own safety.

“Londoners can rightly be proud of their emergency services today. They are the best of the best and we thank everyone for their praise and kind comments.

“I can confirm that sadly some of our colleagues were among the injured in the attack last night. I join all UK police colleagues in wishing them a swift recovery. We are offering them our full support.”

London Bridge Terror Attack







15 show all London Bridge Terror Attack



























1/15 Armed police on Borough High Street as police are dealing with a "major incident" at London Bridge PA

2/15 Armed Police talk to members of the public outside London Bridge Hospital as police are dealing with a "major incident" at London Bridge PA

3/15 Police Officers outside the Barrowboy and Banker Public House on Borough High Street as police are dealing with a "major incident" at London Bridge PA

4/15 Armed police on Borough High Street as police deal with a 'major incident' at London Bridge PA

5/15 Emergency services near the scene of the incident Screengrab

6/15 People run down Borough High Street as police are dealing with a "major incident" at London Bridge Reuters

7/15 Emergency services arrive at the scene near Borough market at London Bridge Carl Court/Getty Images

8/15 Emergency personnel on London Bridge as police are dealing with a "major incident" at London Bridge PA

9/15 Police sniffer dogs on London Bridge as police are dealing with a "major incident" at London Bridge PA

10/15 A second helicopter lands on London Bridge as police are responding to three incidents in the capital, amid reports that a vehicle collided with pedestrians on London Bridge, Scotland Yard said. Officers are dealing with reports of stabbings in Borough Market, where armed officers attended and shots were fired. They are also at an incident in the Vauxhall area PA

11/15 Police attend to an incident on London Bridge in London REUTERS

12/15 Police attend to an incident on London Bridge in London, Britain Reuters

13/15 A police officer escorts members of the public to safety at London Bridge Getty Images

14/15 Police attend to an incident on London Bridge in London, Britain REUTERS

15/15 Police attend to an incident near London Bridge in London, Britain Reuters

An investigation into the attack is ongoing and 12 people have been arrested so far.

Assistant Commissioner for Specialist Operations in the Metropolitan Police, Mark Rowley, said eight police firearms officers fired an "unprecedented" 50 rounds during the attack.

The attackers were shot dead, but a civilian was also shot accidentally by officers, Mr Rowley said.

The passerby's injuries were not believed to be critical and there is to be an independent investigation into the circumstances.