Three French citizens, two Australians, one Canadian, one Spaniard and one Briton died in terror attacks on 3 June

The last of the eight victims of the London Bridge terror attack have been identified as police searching for the missing Frenchman Xavier Thomas recovered a body from the Thames.

With formal identification of the victims still ongoing, the sisters of the missing Spanish banker Ignacio Echeverría confirmed on Wednesday he was among those killed. The London-based HSBC worker was hailed as a hero for using his skateboard to take on the three attackers.



Three French citizens, two Australians, one Canadian, one Spaniard and one Briton are known to have died. The Metropolitan police said they believed they now knew the identities of all those who were killed and there were “no outstanding or missing people”.



Thomas’s next-of-kin were informed that a body had been recovered downstream of London Bridge at Limehouse, east London, at 7.45pm on Tuesday by specialist officers from the marine police unit.



Police believe he was thrown into the river after being struck by the speeding van driven along London Bridge by the attackers before they embarked on a stabbing spree.

Death toll from London Bridge attack rises after body found in Thames Read more

The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said: “As far as French nationals are concerned, there have indeed been three fatalities and eight wounded. We are paying a heavy price in these attacks.”



Thomas, a sales manager from the greater Paris area, was visiting London for the weekend with his girlfriend, Christine Delcros, who was seriously injured by the van and who is now in a stable condition in hospital.



Two other French victims had been named as Sébastien Bélanger, 36, and Alexandre Pigeard, 27, according to French media. Bélanger, a chef at the Coq d’Argent restaurant in the City, had been living in London for seven years, and was reported missing by his girlfriend, Gerda Bennet. He had been watching the Champions league final in Boro Bistro, in Borough Market. Pigeard, from Colleville-Montgomery in Normandy, was a bartender at Boro Bistro.



Echeverría, from Madrid, is thought to have been skateboarding in a park with friends when he stopped to defend a woman who had been injured in the attack near Borough Market.



In a Facebook post, his sister Isabel wrote: “My brother Ignacio tried to stop the terrorist and lost his own life trying to save others. [Ignacio] we love you and we will never forget you.” Another sister, Ana, posted: “Ignacio didn’t survive the moment of the attack. Thank you to all those who love and cared about him. We know we are not the only ones saddened.”



The Spanish foreign ministry paid tribute in a statement, saying his behaviour during the attacks was “exemplary and offers us all a model of solidarity”. It added: “His bravery in defending a defenceless person reminds us of the need to remain united against the scourge of terrorism, against those whose only language is violence and terror.”



His family and the Spanish authorities had expressed frustration over the length of time the identification process was taking. The country’s foreign minister, Alfonso Dastis, said he was “rather baffled” that London had not been able to clarify the situation more than three days after the attack.



The Metropolitan police named Australian au pair Sara Zelenak, 21, as one of the eight to die in the attacks which left another 48 injured, of which 29 are still being treated in five London hospitals, with 10 receiving critical care.

Zelenak got separated from friends in the chaos. In a statement her family, who had been “bracing for the worst”, said: “We are deeply saddened at the tragic loss of our beautiful daughter and sister of Harrison and Scott. Sara’s family and friends are devastated.”

The Australian nurse Kirsty Boden, 28, who worked in theatre recovery at Guy’s hospital where she was described as “one in a million”, died as she ran to help others during the attack. Her family said her actions demonstrated “how selfless, caring and heroic she was”.



The Canadian Christine Archibald, 30, a social worker who died in the arms of her fiance Tyler Ferguson, was the first to be named. Her family said she would have “no understanding of the callous cruelty that caused her death”.



A Londoner, James McMullan, 32, from Hackney, who was about to launch an e-learning business and was on a night out with old school friends, was named by his family. His sister Melissa said: “There will only ever be one James. Nowhere else will you find such humour and unique personality with someone who puts friends and family above all else. He was an inspiration.”



The Met police casualty bureau, set up to deal with those seeking information about loved ones, closed on Wednesday, its team having handled more than 3,500 calls.

• This article was amended on 8 June 2017 to correct the spelling of Sara Zelenak’s name.

