By Dean Kirby and Lewis Smith

Seven people have been killed after people were mown down by a van and stabbed in an attack by three suspected terrorists in the London Bridge area.

A further 36 people are still in hospital, 21 of them in a critical condition.

Metropolitan Police Commissioner Cressida Dick has praised the bravery of members of the public and the police as she announced the death toll had risen.

Met Police Commissioner Cressida Dick: seven people killed in #LondonBridge #LondonAttack, 48 injured and 48 people taken to hospital pic.twitter.com/vksfYVQWET — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 4, 2017

The three male suspects were shot dead by armed police. Mark Rowley, Assistant Met Police Commissioner, says they were shot within eight minutes of the first call to emergency services. He added that the explosives and canisters seen strapped to the vests of some of the suspects were established to have been hoaxes.

A member of the public who was also shot by a police bullet is in hospital receiving treatment. Their injuries are not thought to be life threatening.

At least 48 people were taken to five hospitals on Saturday night, and details of the carnage are still emerging.

At 0025hrs 4/6/17 the incidents at #LondonBridge & #BoroughMarket were declared as terrorist incidents. — Metropolitan Police (@metpoliceuk) June 3, 2017

Early this morning, three explosions were heard close to the offices of The Sun newspaper. They are thought to have been controlled blasts as part of the police operation.

Twelve people have been arrested in Barking, east London in connection with the attack.

Theresa May confirmed in the early hours that the attack was being treated as a “potential act of terrorism”. She will chair an emergency Cobra meeting later this morning. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn tweeted his horror at the attack.

The Prime Minister added: “This is a fast moving investigation. I want to express my huge gratitude to the police and emergency services who are on the scene.

“Our thoughts are with those who are caught up in these dreadful events.”

The attack began when a van travelling at high speed ploughed into people on London Bridge shortly after 10pm. According to one eyewitness, at least three men jumped out of the back and went down Borough High Street “stabbing people at random” with 12-inch knives.

One witness spoke of victims having their throats cut by the attackers. Matthew Jackson, 23, was out with friends when he took a call from his girlfriend.

He told The Sun: “She phoned me in tears saying she’d just seen a man have his throat slit in a bar near London Bridge. She was screaming and crying.”

Another witness said he had seen two attackers shot dead outside a bar by police.

Alex Shellum told the BBC he was in the Mudlark pub when an injured woman staggered in: “She was bleeding heavily from the neck – it appeared that her throat had been cut. People sought to stem the bleeding and the pub was closed.

“Outside the pub, emergency services were performing CPR on a further individual.”

Witnesses reported one of the attackers shouting, “This is for Allah!”

Terrified revellers poured out of restaurants, bars and other premises and were ordered to “Run, Hide and Tell” by police who directed them to safe areas.

A further attack was feared to have taken place in Vauxhall, more than two miles away. Scotland Yard said later that a stabbing in Vauxhall was not related to terrorism. Vauxhall station has since re-opened.

London Ambulance Service said it had taken 20 people to six hospitals and had also treated a number of people at the scene for less serious injuries.

Police boats were searching the river – apparently looking for people who may have been thrown off the bridge – and RNLI lifeboats were also deployed.

Marine 2 and Marine 3 are part of the response to the #London Bridge incident. Working with @RNLI lifeboats to evacuate the public. — MPSonthewater (@MPSonthewater) June 3, 2017

Video at London Bridge has shown dozens of people with their hands on their heads escorted away from the scene by officers.

Another video shows police officers ordering members of the public to “get down” in a bar in the area.

Dramatic footage shows police storming bar at #LondonBridge after security incident. Latest: https://t.co/txyabZqXR7 pic.twitter.com/H5EgZtl1Ko — BBC News (UK) (@BBCNews) June 3, 2017

Emergency services were seen treating people lying injured at the junction of Thrale Street and Southwark Street, near Borough Market.

One woman was taken away on a stretcher while others sat injured on the ground, with shocked people crying and shouting around them.

Frightened people were led up Southwark Street away from Southwark Bridge Road, and police officers were seen screaming to people and ordering them to run.

Many were in tears, with friends supporting each other and carrying people up the road.

Our latest statement about #LondonBridge incident. We've sent a number of resources to scene & more info will follow https://t.co/hCiKVCBrnb pic.twitter.com/nCoIPoXCrV — London Ambulance (@Ldn_Ambulance) June 4, 2017

Cordons were put up across Southwark Street before repeatedly being pushed back as police widened the critical zone around Borough Market.

Nearby Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation hospital said it was “on lockdown to keep patients, relatives and staff safe”.

Holly Jones, a BBC reporter who was at the bridge when the attack happened, said a van swerved off the road and into a crowd of pedestrians.

“A white van driver came speeding – probably about 50mph – veered of the road into the crowds of people who were walking along the pavement,” she told BBC News.

“He swerved right round me and then hit about five or six people. He hit about two people in front of me and then three behind.

“I’d say there are about four severely injured people.”

A taxi driver called Chris told LBC he saw three men armed with foot-long knives after a van drove on to the pavement.

He said: “A van came from London Bridge itself, went between the traffic light system and rammed it towards the steps. It knocked loads of people down.

“Then three men got out with long blades, 12 inches long and went randomly along Borough High Street stabbing people at random.”

Will Orton, 25, said: “We were in the Sheaf pub. Basically lots of people came running inside, we didn’t really know what was going on.

“We thought maybe there was a fight or something outside. And then there were almost hundreds of people coming inside. There was panic – it seemed like it was literally outside the door.

“People were coming inside and saying they had witnessed people being stabbed.”

On Twitter, user Mauro Gulluzzo said: “Just come out of Borough Bistro where attack happen – saw man wielding knife and people on the floor in blood. In total shock.”

‘Shots fired’

One witness reported hearing “significant gunfire”. Others reported five or six shots being fired.

Members of the public were told by police to “run as fast as they could” westbound.

Facebook have activated their “safety check” system in which people can mark themselves as “safe” to assure friends and relatives they are in no danger.

Other users are offering food and shelter to people who are stranded by the terror alert.

People living within the cordon have been advised by police to find somewhere else to sleep for the night.

Tony Murphy, who lives near the area, told Sky News he heard the sound of gunfire.

He said: “I thought at first it was fireworks then I recognised it was significant gunfire and that was the first instance.

“After that (came) the whole shooting match of ambulances and police. There was rapid fire because that’s why I thought it was fireworks.”

Jamie, a witness who was in a restaurant on Rochester Walk, near London Bridge, said: “We were in the Black and Blue restaurant, we heard a fight and everyone got up and everyone rushed out of the restaurant and we heard a massive, massive bang.

“Then we hid under the table and people came into the restaurant and knocked a bunch of stuff over, like the till.

“We ran into the restaurant, into the kitchen, where there was a bunch of other people and a guy had been stabbed and he was cut and he was bleeding quite a lot.”

He added that they waited in the kitchen for “quite a while” before they were evacuated.

A female companion said: “We were in the restaurant and we just saw three guys come into the restaurant, stabbed someone in the face and someone in the stomach.

“One of them had a big knife, then he came in and walked around the restaurant. I guess they just kind of stabbed anyone that they saw and knocked things on the ground and then we just hid.”

Barman Alex Martinez was forced to take shelter in a bin when a knifeman stormed the Borough restaurant in which he worked.

He said: “I remember that I was working behind the bar and one man entered into my restaurant and that’s it – I remember about the third table, second one, next to the door, a man dropped everything and ran out.

“I just tried to be safe, I jumped down behind a big wall, now I feel my pain in my arm, I feel pain.

“I saw that man with a knife in his hand and after that a man started screaming so I knew something wrong was happening.

“The man started screaming and dropping everything on the floor, the plates, the cutlery, the bottle, everything, he dropped it.”

Evacuation

Dozens of people including staying in the Premier Inn Bankside have been evacuated across Southwark Bridge.

Jeremy Corbyn said on Twitter: “Brutal and shocking incidents reported in London. My thoughts are with the victims and their families. Thank you to the emergency services.”

Brutal and shocking incidents reported in London. My thoughts are with the victims and their families. Thank you to the emergency services. — Jeremy Corbyn (@jeremycorbyn) June 3, 2017

Tim Farron, leader of the Liberal Democrats, said: “Tonight’s horrific incidents in London remind us how much we owe our emergency services. My thoughts and prayers with everyone affected.”

White House press secretary Sean Spicer said US president Donald Trump had been given a briefing by his national security team.

Mr Trump has tweeted condolences and support. He wrote: “Whatever the United States can do to help out in London and the UK, we will be there.”

London mayor Sadiq Khan called the terrorist incidents at London Bridge and Borough Market “deliberate and cowardly”, adding there was “no justification” for the “barbaric acts”.

He said: “We don’t yet know the full details, but this was a deliberate and cowardly attack on innocent Londoners and visitors to our city enjoying their Saturday night.

“I condemn it in the strongest possible terms. There is no justification whatsoever for such barbaric acts.”