– Katherina sights set on wearing the royal crown

DONALD J. Trump and Paula M. Shugart, president of the Miss Universe Organisation have announced the roster of celebrities and experts who would judge the 2013 Miss Universe Competition, airing tonight on NBC (9-11 pm ET/PT) from Crocus City Hall in Moscow.

And even as all this is happening Guyana’s delegate to this international pageant, Katherina Roshana waits with breath abated with her sights and all her focus set on being the woman to wear the coveted crown.

There were times when we thought Guyana’s chances at winning in this pageant were very slim. But this year with the remarkable beauty sent to battle on our behalf, we have to agree that our chances of winning are so much better with Katherina’s presence on the international front.

This young woman has the brain and the beauty and can certainly make a breakthrough if she receives the unanimous support of Guyanese she needs at this critical point in the competition.

The panel of judges for the Miss Universe 2013 Pageant includes Steven Tyler, Aerosmith’s front man and lead singer; Chef Nobu, acclaimed chef proprietor of Nobu and Matsuhisa restaurants; Tara Lipinski, Gold medal figure skater and 2014 Winter Olympics figure skating analyst for NBC Olympics’ multi-platform coverage; Carol Alt, TV personality, star of Fox News Channel’s ‘A HEALTHY YOU AND CAROL ALT’, international supermodel, actress, author, entrepreneur and raw-food enthusiast;Anne V, Supermodel, actress, philanthropist and mentor on Oxygen’s upcoming season of ‘The Face’, with nine consecutive appearances in Sports Illustrated Swimsuit issue.

Also on the panel are Farouk Shami, Founder of Farouk Systems, Inc., makers of CHI and presenting hair care sponsor of the 2013 Miss Universe Competition; Italo Fontana, pioneering designer of U-BOAT Watches; and Philip Kirkorov, iconic Russian pop-star.

In addition to his judging duties, Tyler will take the stage for a special performance.

Tyler and the celebrity judges join an exciting broadcast that includes performances by Grammy-nominated band, ‘Panic!’, and The Disco and international recording artist EMIN.

As previously announced, Thomas Roberts, anchor of ‘MSNBC Live’; and Melanie Brown, best known to audiences as ‘Mel B’ (of America’s Got Talent fame), will co-host the pageant.

Jeannie Mai, recognised for her fashion segments on NBC’s “Today,” will serve as commentator.

Throughout the Miss Universe competition, contestants representing 86 countries will compete in three categories: Swimsuit, evening gown, and interview. The telecast concludes with Miss Universe 2012, Olivia Culpo, crowning her successor.

Italian swimwear and lingerie designer, Yamamay, will unveil their official Miss Universe collection during the worldwide telecast, by featuring a one-of-a-kind emerald, ruby and diamond swimsuit valued at US$1M. The new Miss Universe will be photographed in the million-dollar suit the day after the event.

Up until yesterday, fans were encouraged to vote their favourite contestant into the semifinals through the Miss Universe Fan Vote, sponsored by High 5 Games, by logging on to http://www.missuniverse.com or http://www.telemundo.com (NYNBC)