Manasi Moghe has been crowned Miss Diva 2013 (Miss Universe India 2013) by Zeenat Aman at the grand finale of the first edition of Miss Diva beauty pageant at the Westin Mumbai Garden City, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India on Thursday night of 5th September, 2013. Miss Diva 2013 beauty pageant hosted by Vivan Bhatena and RJ Mantra.

Manasi Moghe will paint India at the 62nd edition of Miss Universe beauty contest as Miss Universe India 2013 at the Crocus City Hall in Moscow, Russia on this November, 2013.



Manasi Moghe’s Biography & Photo Gallery :

Manasi Moghe is 21 years old. She is a student. She likes to Singing, Dancing, Travelling, playing Volleyball and Music. Her favourite actor is Ranbir Kapoor and Deepika Padukone. Her favourite movies are Rang de Basanti, Love Aaj Kal and If Only. She is a winner ofLakme Absolute Femina Miss Eyeconic Eyes Pune title, Ponds Pink Tiara Wild Card’ Winner Mumba and Finalist of Ponds Femina Miss India 2013.



Miss Diva 2013 Top 5 Contestants :

Gurleen Grewal has won the First Runner-up Miss Diva 2013 title. Srishti Rana has won the Second Runner-up Miss Diva 2013 title. Shruti Tuli and Jhataleka Malhotra were other top five finalists.



Miss Diva 2013 Q & A Round :

Top 7 beauty contestants :

A question for Gurleen Grewal by Malaika Arora Khan, “Choose between homemaker and a career women.”

Gurleen Grewal replied, “career gives a woman respect in society. It would be a career oriented woman.”

A question for Manasi Moghe by Kunal Kapoor, Social Media is a hurt ot society or benefit to society?

Manasi Monge answered, “Social media is helpful and beneficial….it has so many advantages and disadvantages …we can intreact with people and spread our contact …very good media to publicize. it is a public media, we can discuss public issues through social media.”

Sahar Biniaz to Shruti Tuli, As a independent Indian woman do you feel government should decide what you should wear in college?

Shruti answered, “As a young woman on 21st century. College ek vidya ka mandir hai jaha padhne jaate hai. Our mind should be noticed instead of watching our clothes.”

Zeenat Aman asked a question to Srishti Rana, Many states have legalize gay marriages, are you in favor? why or why not?

Shrishti Rana replied, “I feel gay marriages nothing wrong in it. As long as two people are happy and smile forever, this kind of reunion doesnt make a difference.”

Jacquline Fernandes asked a question to Sukanya Bhattacharya, Should reservation be there?

Sukanya answered, “I believe in our country India. It cover larager section of society. Women are not educared in rural areas. The reservation and quota gives women walk head to head with men. Reservation system should be there in India.”

A question for Sushrii Mishra by Raveena Tondon, Mercy killing are you in favour of it or not?

Sushrii answered, “Euthansisia is a sensitive issue. I am a believer of life and hope. and for me it is giving up hope and life. i believe in celebrating life. even if they say it is mercy killing there is no mercy in it.“



Miss Diva 2013 Special Awards :

Preeti Chauhan has won the Miss Perfect Body title. Sonika Chauhan has won the Westin Miss Popular award. Nischitha Rao has won the Miss Runway title. Jhataleka Malhotra has won the Miss Photogenic special award. Seep Taneja has won the Miss Times Sudoku title. Yashna Khurana has won the Eyetex Miss Beautiful Eyes award. Sushri Shreya Mishra has won the Miss Digital crown.



Miss Diva 2013 14 Finalists :

The fourteen Miss Diva 2013 contestants are in alphabetical order as below.

21 years old Gurleen Grewal from Chandigarh, 19 years old Jhataleka Malhotra from Mumbai, 21 years old Manasi Moghe, 22 years old Nischitha Rao from Bangalore, 26 years old Preeti Chauhan from Mumbai, 24 years old Seep Taneja from Jalandhar, 19 years old Shruti Tuli from Amritsar, 23 years old Sona Goldar from Kolkata, 24 years old Sonika Chauhan from Kolkata, 20 years old Srishti Rana from Faridabad, 21 years old Sukanya Bhattacharya from Patna, 22 years old Sushrii Shreya Mishraa from Sambalpur (Orissa), 23 years old Trishla Chandola from New Delhi and 22 years old Yashna Khurana from Delhi.



Miss Diva 2013 14 Judges :

Welknown celebrities, Bolloywood stars and beauties were At the red carpet of Miss Diva 2013.

Bollywood Actress Jacqueline Fernandez, Raveena Tandon, Zeenat Aman, Malaika Arora Khan, Former Miss Universe Canada Sahar Biniaz, Bollywood Actor Kunal Kapoor, Fashion photographer Atul Kasbekar were judges of grand coronation night of Miss Diva 2013.