The Bb. Pilipinas 2013 is currently on-going at the historic Smart Araneta Coliseum attended by thousands of Filipinos. Numerous celebrities were also spotted in the venue.

We are going to share to you our live coverage of the most prestigious beauty pageant in the country as we celebrate 50 Golden years of Filipina beauties. We are going the maximize the use of social media to cover the event as it happens.

Aside from our reporters inside the venue, our media center were tracking the events through their mobile devices for the latest updates.

Here’s our live coverage:

Opening number of the 50 beautiful candidates. The show is hosted by Martin Nievera and Dawn Zulueta. Alice Dixson and Dang Cecilio-Palanca join Shamcey Supsup and Venus Raj inside the commentators box.

Martin Nivera opens the show sings the Bb. Pilipinas theme song. He is joined by Bb Pilipinas titleholders past and present.

Judges of the Bb. Pilipinas 2013

Special Awards:

Miss Friendship, Binibini 21. Lourenz Grace Remetillo.

Miss Talent, Binibini 10. Anna Carmela Aquino.

Best in National Costume, Binibini 37 Alaine Baccay.

Manila Bulletin Readers’ Choice Award. Binibini 22. Ellore Noelle Punzalan.

Bb Petron, Binibini 16 Joanna Cindy Miranda.

Miss Photogenic, Binibini 39 Mutya Johanna Datul.

Swimsuit competition ends

Video montage of Binibining Pilipinas highlights.

BPCI was founded in 1964.

First Miss Universe title won in 1969, followed by another in 1973.

BbPilipinasGold evening gown competition ongoing

First 25 Contestant on their evening gown followed by a break via production number and the Remaining 25 contestant graced the stage of the Bb. Pilipinas Golden stage.

Sam Concepcion, Matteo Guidicelli, Xian Lim, Sam Milby serenade the next batch. They are singing a cover of Smokey Mountain’s “Kailan”

Next batch of special awards are up next.

Cream Silk Beyond Beautiful Woman Award, Bb 16 Joanna Cindy Miranda

Bb San Miguel Zero Fit and Sexy Body, Bb 15 Pia Wurtzbach

Bb Avon, Bb 20 Bea Rose Santiago

Bb Philippine Airlines, Bb 4 Nicole Kim Donesa

Bb Pilipinas-PAGCOR: #45 Imelda Schweighart.

Best in Swimsuit: #41 Ariella Arida

Best in Evening Gown: #39 Mutya Johanna Datul

Up Next: TOP 15 Finalists

Question and Answer Portion:

End of Q & A Portion. Reigning Bb. Pilipinas Queens on their Final Walk.

Here’s the Winners of the Bb. Pilipinas 2013:

1st Runner up. Bb 15 Pia Wurtzbach

Bb Pilipinas Supranational: Mutya Johanna Datul

Bb Pilipinas Tourism Bb 16 Joanna Cindy Miranda

Bb Pilipinas International Bb 20 Bea Rose Santiago

Bb. Pilipinas Universe Bb. 41 Ariella Arida