SOMERVILLE — Francesco Pascuzzi says he's petitioning the Miss Universe Organization — of which he is a big fan — to reconsider its decision to host the 2013 pageant in Russia because the country's new anti-gay laws make it an unsafe destination for those who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or questioning their sexuality.

Pascuzzi, a Somerville native, started a petition on Change.org two weeks ago, stating is he "shocked and disappointed that the Miss Universe Organization has chosen to host its competition this year in Russia, where LGBTQ people are under attack."

The petition now has just shy of 24,000 signatures.

In the petition, Pascuzzi refers to anti-gay laws signed by Russia's Prime Minister Vladimir Putin in June that impose fines on people accused of spreading "propaganda of nontraditional sexual relations" to minors, and even proposes penalties for those who express those views online or in the news media, according to the Associated Press.

Gay pride rallies also are banned, and foreign citizens would face fines of up to $3,000, time in prison of up to 15 days, deportation and denial of reentry into Russia, the AP reported.

While people who identify as LGBTQ are not banned from the country, behavior that could be seen as "propagandizing" could get someone in trouble, according to the AP.

Recently, four Dutch citizens working on a gay rights documentary in Russia were detained under the new law, but their case did not make it to court, the AP reported.

Because of these instances, Pascuzzi said, Russia is no longer a safe place for the Miss Universe Organization to host its pageant.

"When the Miss Universe Organization allowed transgender beauty Jenna Talackova to enter the Miss Universe Canada pageant in 2012, reversing its previous policies on the matter, it sent a strong and unequivocal message in favor of equality and of the LGBTQ community," Pascuzzi said. "Choosing Russia as a host country undermines this progress."

Among those who signed the petition is Abby DePhillips, Miss Teen New Jersey.

"Beauty queens should be looking towards the future," she wrote. "Allowing Russia to host Miss Universe 2013 pushes us back years and years. ... I believe the MUO needs to find a new location, preferably one with better laws and values."

Some supporters who signed the petition said if the pageant is hosted in Russia, they would either boycott the television broadcast or not travel to the pageant.

Jorge Rivera, of Philadelphia, said he has been traveling to the host country for the pageant for 12 years without hesitation. But this year is different.

"This year will be the first time since 2001 that I will not travel due to its host city/country agenda against LGBT," he wrote on the petition page. "How could I travel to a country where I know I am being hated, discriminated and will be in danger even before landing from the plane? MUO needs to re-think about this and make a good decision.

John Abbott, of Worcester, Mass., said the pageant's reputation would be tarnished if it hosted in Russia.

And Tori Helle, of Waldoville, Kansas, also said allowing the pageant to be held in Russia undermines the organization's reputation.

"I am a transwoman, and I was elated to see one of my sisters finally be allowed to show off her hard earned beauty," she said. "To allow the Miss Universe Pageant to be held in Russia not only undermines the previous showing of equality support, it does definitely undermine the organizations reputation as well."

Requests for comment left for Miss Universe representatives were not immediately returned Thursday morning.