British troops at risk of war crimes trials after Clegg gaffe over 'illegal' Iraq war



Nick Clegg declared the invasion of Iraq 'illegal' yesterday - leaving British troops and Tony Blair at risk of war crimes trials brought by opponents of the war.

The Deputy Prime Minister plunged Westminster into chaos by stating his personal view during Prime Minister's Question Time in the Commons as if it was Government policy.

Standing in for David Cameron, who is thousands of miles away in America, Mr Clegg taunted Labour MPs that they had supported 'the illegal invasion of Iraq'.

In the hot seat: Nick Clegg at PMQs today

But his outburst sparked fury in the ranks of the Armed Forces, who specifically requested Government legal backing before the invasion because they feared being dragged to the International Criminal Court in The Hague.



With Mr Cameron out of the country the intervention led to a day of coalition chaos in which:



Mr Clegg claimed that the Yarl's Wood detention centre would be closed just hours before the Home Office said only part of it would shut down n LibDem deputy leader Simon Hughes announced he had joined with Labour to oppose government cuts to housing benefit



The Tories said Vince Cable's plans for a graduate tax would never happen n Cameron loyalist Oliver Letwin said the coalition government was 'much better' than a fully Tory administration would have been

Downing Street announced that the coalition had 'no view' on whether the Iraq invasion was legal - a move that undercut the conclusions of Labour Attorney General Lord Goldsmith.

Oops: Mr Clegg said Yarl's Wood would close - but only the family unit will

A No 10 spokesman said that the Government would wait until the Chilcot Inquiry into the Iraq conflict before stating its position on the legality of the conflict.



But that strategy was torpedoed last night when Sir John Chilcot made clear that he will not rule on whether the war was legal.

Lord Boyce, the Chief of the Defence Staff at the time of the 2003 invasion, dismissed the Government's decision to rely on Chilcot and said that if anyone was dragged to court it should be Tony Blair and not front line soldiers.



He said: 'They're talking rubbish if they want to fall back on Chilcot.



'That is outside his remit. The Attorney General assured me that the war was legal. I've got the piece of paper.







'If there is going to be any legal action that assurance means it should start with Mr Blair in the dock before the soldiers.



'He gave the legal top cover to the military. That's exactly why I insisted at the time on getting a legal opinion.'

Reg Keys, whose son Tom was killed in Iraq, said he would be prepared to launch a legal case against Mr Blair based on Mr Clegg's statement in the Commons.

He said: 'I would relish that. It would be immensely satisfying and I will seriously consider it if I can raise enough funds.'







Former Labour defence minister Kevan Jones said: 'This was a cheap political point scoring exercise that has resulted in a grave error and it opens our brave servicemen and women to the prospect of legal action.

'Nick Clegg is effectively saying that half the Coalition Government, including the Prime Minister, voted for an illegal war.

'He has to realise that there is a difference between rhetoric and soundbites in opposition and responsibility in Government.'

Downing Street was forced to admit that Mr Clegg was talking in an 'individual' capacity.

No 10 issued a statement making clear that the 400 troops still in Iraq were there legally because they have 'the permission of the Iraqi Government'.



CABLE UNIVERSITY TAX BLOW Vince Cable's plan to replace university fees with a graduate tax has already been sidelined amid splits in the coalition.

The Business Secretary used a major speech last week to float plans for graduates to pay for university through a tax on earnings, with the best-paid worst hit.

But senior Tories say the blueprint has major shortcomings and is 'unlikely' to be adopted. The revelation is embarrassing for Mr Cable days after he insisted the graduate tax idea must be considered 'as a priority'. Labour said the coalition's position was shambolic.

PS... BUT AT LEAST OLIVER LETWIN IS HAPPY

Britain is better governed than it would have been under the Tories alone, David Cameron's policy chief claimed last night. In comments which will infuriate the Tory right, Oliver Letwin suggested the coalition deal had delivered a stronger and better government. The Cabinet Office minister said his colleagues were forced to think through policies more thoroughly and reintroduce proper Cabinet government. He added that a majority government may or may not have had such noble ambitions.

But a spokesman added: 'The Coalition Government has not expressed a view on the legality or otherwise of the Iraq conflict.'

Lawyers warned last night that an international court would listen to the words of a senior government minister spoken in the House of Commons as evidence that the war was illegal.

Colonel Tim Collins, who led the Royal Irish Regiment during the invasion, said: 'It's not very helpful. It is ill advised for the Deputy Prime Minister to get on his hind legs and say this sort of thing.'