Baghdad closer to collapse / Army, Marine tanks and troops lay waste to ministries, capture air base, repel Iraqi counterattack / BAGHDAD: The city wonders -- when will Americans take over?







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Photo: DAVID LEESON Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 One of two A-10 Warthog planes circles past smoke from burning Republican Guard barracks in northern Baghdad, Tuesday, April 8, 2003. One of the planes was later hit by an Iraqi surface-to-air-missile forcing the pilot to eject. The pilot was safely recovered. (AP Photo/Dallas Morning News, David Leeson) less One of two A-10 Warthog planes circles past smoke from burning Republican Guard barracks in northern Baghdad, Tuesday, April 8, 2003. One of the planes was later hit by an Iraqi surface-to-air-missile forcing ... more Photo: DAVID LEESON Image 2 of 4 - - Photo: LAURENT REBOURS Image 3 of 4 Iraqi civilians push carts loaded with goods after looting a government warehouse on a main road leading into Baghdad in a southeastern suburb of the Iraqi capital, Wednesday, April 9, 2003. (AP Photo/Laurent Rebours) less Iraqi civilians push carts loaded with goods after looting a government warehouse on a main road leading into Baghdad in a southeastern suburb of the Iraqi capital, Wednesday, April 9, 2003. (AP Photo/Laurent ... more Photo: LAURENT REBOURS Image 4 of 4 Baghdad closer to collapse / Army, Marine tanks and troops lay waste to ministries, capture air base, repel Iraqi counterattack / BAGHDAD: The city wonders -- when will Americans take over? 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

2003-04-09 04:00:00 PDT Baghdad -- The last vestiges of Saddam Hussein's regime began to evaporate Tuesday as his fighters all but disappeared from large sections of Baghdad and his propaganda machine seemed to collapse.

After a spectacular foray in the early morning, with U.S. and Iraqi troops trading bursts of fire, the Americans captured a huge swath of western Baghdad,

and the thousands of Iraqi soldiers on the densely populated eastern bank of the Tigris River seemed to sense that the end was near. By dusk they had disappeared, and only a few lightly armed militiamen guarded key intersections.

LATEST SFGATE VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing Woman hit by Sacramento sheriff's deputy vehicle during Stephon Clark protest Guy Danilowitz

The wettest and driest places in the Bay Area Ted Andersen, Alix Martichoux, SFGATE

The Regulars: The Mushroom Hacker Nani Walker, Robin Simmonds and Lauren Schwartzman

Candy Land: How West Oakland's Ocho Candy Makes Its Organic Sweet Treats Sarah Fritsche

Bernal Heights hit-and-run San Francisco Chronicle

Woman's car plunges 300 feet off cliff near Pacifica California Highway Patrol

SF Brewing Co. Ghirardelli Square Virtual Tour San Francisco Chronicle

The story behind You're Going to Die, SF's death-related open mike San Francisco Chronicle

Protesting the death of Stephon Clark: ‘You murdered a Son’ New York Times

David Nayfeld making pasta San Francisco Chronicle

Increasing numbers of young and middle-aged men in military haircuts could be seen lounging around in casual civilian clothes -- as if they had just stashed their uniforms in a closet somewhere.

The Ministry of Information, which has acted as Hussein's mouthpiece, also seemed to vanish. State television, with its stock footage of Hussein reviewing troops and waving to crowds, was knocked off the air after U.S. troops based at a presidential palace attacked the ministry and broadcast center. And after a brief, chaotic midmorning appearance at the Palestine Hotel, which was rocked by a tank round that killed two of the scores of international journalists holed up there, Information Minister Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf and his top aides were nowhere to be seen.

By the end of the day, the mood shift was dramatic. The streets emptied of vehicle traffic, as if people feared that they might stumble on a column of U. S. tanks as they crossed the street.

WAITING FOR THE AMERICANS

The few people still on the streets of Baghdad worried out loud about when the Americans would roll across the bridges spanning the Tigris River and take control of downtown -- would it be as soon as today?

Even far down in the regime's hierarchy, Baath Party loyalists suddenly sensed that their own private D-Day might be coming soon. In late afternoon, most of the Information Ministry's "minders" -- the combination political chaperone, translator, facilitator and bodyguard that the government has deployed to try to control the foreign press -- suddenly asked the journalists to pay their $75-a-day accumulated fees to date.

"Tomorrow, things may be completely different," said one minder, who asked to remain anonymous, just in case his bosses stuck around for a few more days. "We may not have jobs. What is our future? We have no idea."

The man noted that the higher-ups had already cashed in their chips. Late last week, the ministry's press office required journalists to pay off their accreditation fees for working in Iraq -- up to $300 per person per day, payable only in U.S. dollars cash. The haul from approximately 250 foreign journalists in Baghdad was estimated at $1 million.

However, despite these signs of collapse, it was far from clear Tuesday whether the regime would simply vanish and allow U.S. forces to assume control peacefully or whether Hussein's security forces might lash out in violent death throes. If the last remnants of the regime go down fighting, there could still be significant bloodshed.

DIE-HARD RESISTANCE

The wild card is the Baath Party militias -- especially the Fedayeen Saddam,

the hard-line group in civilian clothes that has put up a fierce resistance to American and British troops in cities throughout southern Iraq. Some of the Fedayeen Saddam were still on the streets throughout the day, and late in the afternoon, about 100 staged a demonstration in front of the Palestine Hotel, chanting, "We will sacrifice our life for you, Saddam."

Many Baghdad residents were wide-eyed Tuesday, wondering at the new sense of freedom in the air. But out of long-honed instinct, they still hedged their bets while angling for a secure place in the new Iraq.

"Yes, things are changing," said Osama Yessin, a fruit vendor in the Kerradeh neighborhood in the eastern part of the city. "A lot of people may be leaving," he said, waving his hand upward in a typical Iraqi gesture referring to Hussein's elite. "This is good. The Americans are welcome."

But then something seemed to click inside Yessin, triggering old survival instincts and old habits. "But we will fight the Americans, and they will all die," he said, stroking his ample stomach.