Trump unveils list of potential picks for Supreme Court seat WASHINGTON (AP) — Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump on Wednesday released a list of 11 potential picks to replace Antonin Scalia on the U.S. Supreme Court, a mix of federal and state judges that appeared tailored to win over conservatives still skeptical of his candidacy.

US intelligence: Foreign hackers spying on campaigns WASHINGTON (AP) — The United States sees evidence of hackers, possibly working for foreign governments, snooping on the presidential candidates, the nation's intelligence chief said Wednesday. Government officials are assisting the campaigns to tighten security as the race for the White House intenifies.

10 Things to Know for Thursday Your daily look at late-breaking news, upcoming events and the stories that will be talked about Thursday:

Methodists trying to avoid church split over gay rights Struggling to avoid a split over gay rights, the top policy-making body of the United Methodist Church on Wednesday narrowly approved a full review of all church law on sexuality, amid an emotional meeting roiled by talk of schism.

Nigerian girl kidnapped 2 years ago is found alive LAGOS, Nigeria (AP) — One of the teenagers kidnapped by Boko Haram extremists over two years ago from a boarding school in northeastern Nigeria has been found with a baby and reunited with her mother, a doctor said Wednesday — the first of the Chibok girls to be recovered since the mass abduction.

APNewsBreak: Lebanese man held in Iran had past US contracts DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (AP) — A nonprofit organization headed by a Lebanese citizen held prisoner in Iran received grants totaling $730,000 from the U.S. government for projects in the Middle East, The Associated Press has learned.

California turns water conservation over to local officials FRESNO, Calif. (AP) — California decided Wednesday to allow hundreds of local water districts to set their own conservation goals after a wet winter eased the five-year drought in some parts of the state.

Climate change, runaway development worsen Houston floods HOUSTON (AP) — With clay soil and tabletop-flat terrain, Houston has endured flooding for generations. Its 1,700 miles of man-made channels struggle to dispatch storm runoff to the Gulf of Mexico.

New penis recipient looks forward to being a 'complete' man BOSTON (AP) — The recipient of the nation's first penis transplant says he is looking forward to walking out of the hospital a "complete" man.