IraqiNews: Two civilians wounded in bomb attack near Baghdad shops Two people were wounded in a bomb attack that hit northern Baghdad shops early on Sunday, a security source was quoted as saying. Speaking to Baghdad Today, the source said, “An explosive charge went off near industrial shops in al-Taji district, north of Baghdad.”

IraqiNews: Iraqi troops kill Islamic State’s slaughterer, nine companions in Anbar Iraqi Special Forces carried out on Sunday an unexpected military operation in Anbar province, managing to kill 10 Islamic State (IS) militants, including a senior leader, who is code-named as the IS slaughterer, intelligence sources were quoted as saying.

Reuters: Syrian SDF says not informed of any U.S. withdrawal plan The U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) said on Friday it had not been informed of any plan to withdraw U.S. forces operating in Syria as part of the coalition against Islamic State.

middleeastmonitor: Teachers in Kurdistan, Iraq, demand payment of salaries Dozens of teachers in the provinces of Sulaymaniyah and Erbil in northern Iraq protested yesterday against the austerity measures and demanded the Kurdistan Regional Government pay their salaries in full, the Anadolu Agency reported. Teachers have called for a review of their salaries and an end to the savings system which saw the government reduce their wages in an effort to cut costs. They threatened to continue their protests and sit-in, and expand them if their demands are not met.

IraqiNews: Iraqi military denies news on abduction of 50 security conscripts in Anbar The Joint Operations Command has denied news about abduction of 50 security conscripts on the international road in Anbar. In a statement posted by the Security Media Center, the command said, “Al-Ittijiah satellite channel posted false news about kidnapping of 50 conscripts of the border troops and army on the international road in Anbar.”

IraqiNews: Four civilians wounded in bomb explosion in central Kirkuk Four civilians were wounded Sunday in a bomb explosion in Kirkuk governorate, a police spokesman was quoted as saying. Speaking to Alsumaria News, spokesman for Kirkuk Police Afrasiaw Kamil said, “An explosive charge placed under a car went off in central Kirkuk, leaving four passers-by wounded.”

xinhuanet: 9 killed in insurgent attacks in central Iraq Five paramilitary Hashd Shaabi fighters and four civilians were killed Saturday in two incidents in the Iraqi provinces of Kirkuk and Diyala, a security source and official said. The Iraqi forces found the bodies of five Hashd Shaabi fighters from the Turkoman minority, who were kidnapped three hours earlier in the day by gunmen outside their base in the town of Hawijah, some 45 km southwest of Kirkuk," Captain Ahmed al-Obeidi from Hawijah police told Xinhua.

IraqiNews: Islamic State group claims responsibility for killing, injuring 103 Iraqi troops Islamic State (IS) group claimed that its militants killed and injured 103 government troops within a month in different Iraqi cities. In an online statement, a copy of which was obtained by IKH News, the militant group said, “Another 13 Iraqi troops were taken captive during the period from February 19 to March 21.”