Claiming the legacy of Mr. Sadr’s revered father, Ayatollah Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr, who was assassinated in 1999, the group forged a martial culture and became one of the most implacable enemies of the American occupation, fighting the United States military twice in 2004. Four years later, the movement was at a nadir: With Mr. Sadr in exile and his militias blamed for some of the war’s worst sectarian carnage, the Iraqi military, with decisive American help, vanquished the group in Baghdad and Basra, Iraq’s second largest city. The divided movement itself seemed a spent force.

Photo

But in local elections in 2009, it made impressive gains, foreshadowing the remarkable discipline it showed in national elections last year. The 40 seats it won — second only to Mr. Maliki’s bloc among the Shiite majority — brought it to the center of Iraqi politics and, to its supporters at least, signaled the group’s transition from a militia force to a mainstream political group. Mr. Sadr’s surprise decision in August to support Mr. Maliki, his longtime antagonist, for a second term as prime minister effectively decided the election in Mr. Maliki’s favor. Mr. Sadr’s followers exacted repayment in critical government posts.

“His presence in Iraq, it will strengthen the resolve of our Sadrist brothers to serve the people of Iraq,” said Muhammad al-Khafaji, a former bodyguard of Mr. Sadr’s who won a seat in the election.

Mr. Sadr is a vastly different figure than when he left in 2007 to pursue his clerical studies — and to avoid an arrest warrant for the killing of a rival cleric in 2003.

In his early days, he was often derided as too young, even dimwitted, and his physical appearance — he is squat and pudgy — did little to inspire confidence. The man who appeared on Wednesday had aged, with gray streaking his beard, and he seemed to stride with more confidence. In recent public statements, it appears that he has overcome the awkwardness he displayed in 2003. He now delivers his speeches in a refined, if simple and deliberate Arabic.

It was unclear whether Mr. Sadr would still face criminal charges. Mr. Kadhum, the Sadrist lawmaker, said there was no warrant for the cleric’s arrest. “That was just from the previous government to target the Sadrists, to take us away from the political process,” Mr. Kadhum said.

Hussain al-Saffi, a lawmaker from Mr. Maliki’s bloc, said the government had “no intention or inclination to raise any legal issues related to Mr. Moktada.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There were conflicting reports, too, about whether Mr. Sadr’s return was permanent or merely a visit. Even some of his own supporters seemed unsure.

Photo

“It’s up to His Eminence to stay permanently in Najaf or go back to Iran,” said Balqis al-Khafaji, who was a Sadrist candidate.

Mr. Sadr’s return from Qum, a seat of Shiite scholarship in Iran, had long been rumored. In the weeks before the elections, many of his supporters were convinced that it was imminent. There was no advance word of his trip on Wednesday, and many of his followers learned of his arrival from television reports.

If he stays in Iraq, his impact on politics, at least in the short term, may be more symbolic than real. The movement has performed well in his absence, with its delegates impressing even the movement’s critics with their skills in the negotiations that led to the formation of the government last month. One analyst suggested that the success of an emerging Sadrist leadership inside Iraq might have motivated Mr. Sadr to come back.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“The return has major political significance,” said Hazem al-Amin, a writer with the Arabic newspaper Al Hayat in Beirut. “His party is becoming stronger and bigger, and the need for him to preside over it has grown, especially since there is fear that new leaders within the party could surpass him.”

At the very least, Mr. Sadr becomes one of the few national leaders with the grass-roots support to compete with Mr. Maliki, whom Mr. Sadr’s supporters had derided only recently as an heir to Saddam Hussein and an American lackey. Mr. Sadr’s support for the prime minister came with a high price: hundreds of his followers were released from prison, and the movement was given leadership of a province, positions in the security forces and control of some ministries.

The Sadr-Maliki rivalry may become more intense as the deadline nears for all United States troops to withdraw from Iraq by the end of 2011. Some American officials have suggested that Mr. Maliki would be open to an extension for at least some troops — a position that Mr. Sadr would almost certainly refuse.

The perception of Mr. Sadr as a wild card has led some of his supporters to worry that his return may incite strife. And while, for many, he captured the voice of populist anger against the American occupation, he remains — especially to Iraq’s Sunni minority — synonymous with the black-clad death squads of 2006-7.

“I don’t think Moktada will bring good with him to Iraq,” said Muhammad al-Adhami, a government worker in Adhamiya, a largely Sunni area in Baghdad.