The Kurdish peshmerga forces will not be integrated into the Iraqi army: Sangawi- Interview Interview Kurd Net does not take credit for and is not responsible for the content of news information on this page

The Kurdish peshmerga forces will not be integrated into the Iraqi army: Sangawi- Interview 22.1.2010

By Shakhwan Mahmoud









January 22, 2010



SULAIMANIYAH , Kurdistan region 'Iraq', — While the Peshmerga Ministry of the Kurdistan Regional government is busy unifying the two Kurdish parties’ forces (the Peshmerga), in a step considered the first of its kind, rumors say that these forces will be integrated into the Iraqi army.



On the obstacles and challenges of unifying the two parties’ forces, and the integration rumors, Niqash met Mahmoud al-Sangawi, Secretary General of the Peshmerga forces and member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK).



Q: To what extent are the statements made on the integration of the Peshmerga into the Iraqi army true?



Sangawi: The Peshmerga forces will not be integrated into the Iraqi army, but the two parties’ forces – the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP), headed by Massoud Barzani, and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), headed by Jalal Talabani, will be unified and renamed the Kurdistan Region Border Guard.

Sangawi Secretary General of the Peshmerga forces and member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) Q: If the forces are unified as you say, do you anticipate any problems arising between the two Kurdish parties on how military posts are shared out?



Sangawi: No, I don’t expect any problems. There is a very well scripted mechanism that specifies how to integrate two forces, to unify them, and on how to choose qualified members to hold leading positions. The two forces will be deployed in different areas and each force will be responsible for its own military area. If any member of the border guards commits a mistake, www.ekurd.net he will be brought before a court and will be held responsible for his acts without any consideration for his membership in one of the two parties. That will be the real proof of a united army.



Q: What about the rumors that the US troops are going to train the Peshmerga forces?



Sangawi: The Peshmerga will be trained inside the Kurdistan Region and the training will be supervised by the US army.



Q: Is there a place in Kurdistan to train the military forces?



Sangawi: Yes, there are areas for this purpose in Karmayan, Sulaimaniyah, Badinand and Erbil.



Q: Will the Peshmerga receive arms, and especially heavy arms, similar to those used by the Iraqi army?



Sangawi: Yes, according to promises made by US Forces-Iraq Commanding General Ray Odierno the Americans will train our forces and equip them with all kinds of weapons that the Iraqi army has received. These are not only military promises, but also political ones and are made by US leaders.



Q: Will there be tanks and helicopters?



Sangawi: According to the agreement between Iraq and the United States, and if approval is given by Iraq’s Ministry of Defense, the regional guard may receive all kinds of equipment that the Iraqi army receives with the exception of warplanes. Warplanes should only be held by central government.



Q: Who is in command of the border guards – the regional government or the government in Baghdad?



Sangawi: Division number 16, which protects the area extending from Khaneqin to Ridar, and division number 15, which protects everything between Ridar, Badinan and Mosul, are under the command of the Iraqi army and receive their military instructions from Baghdad. The rest of the border guard will be under the command of the regional presidency and the Kurdistan parliament. If the central government wants to use these troops for any purpose, it must obtain approval from both the parliament and the regional president.



Q: If the region is being attacked by one of the neighboring states, can the President of Kurdistan Region move the Peshmerga without the approval of the central government?



Sangawi: We hope that there will be no conflicts or wars with neighboring countries. But, in such an event, we cannot fight with any country if we do not receive the [Baghdad] parliament’s approval because we are part of Iraq.



Q: How many soldiers are there in each division?



Sangawi: Each division comprises 14,750 fighters. The two divisions therefore make up 29,500 fighters.



Q: How many divisions will make up the border guard and what is the total number of soldiers?



Sangawi: The region’s forces will not consist of divisions but of 21 brigades. I don’t have the figures and these are military secrets that shouldn’t be revealed.



Q: What is the budget of the Peshmerga and who is entitled to use it?



Sangawi: The budget of the Peshmerga comes from the region’s government. Because the (PUK and KDP) troops have not yet been unified, I don't know how much is allocated.



Q: If the Peshmerga becomes the border guards, would its budget come from the region or from Baghdad?



Sangawi: It will be taken out of the region’s budget and we hope to receive a part from the sovereignty budget allocated to the national Ministry of Defense, which the Peshmerga should be part of.



Q: The Peshmerga fighters are complaining about their salaries. Will these fighters receive a raise similar to the raise in the salaries of the Iraqi army?



Sangawi: Yes, when the Peshmerga is unified and re-organized, we will give a raise similar to that given to the Iraqi army members.



Q: What percentage of the Iraqi army are Kurds?



Sangawi: The Kurds are meant to be more than 22% but are currently just 8%, which is a very low percentage.



Q: Is it true that a number of the Peshmerga forces were fired after the Kurdistan parliamentary elections, which took place in July 2009, because they voted for the opposition Change List headed by Nashirwan Mustafa?



Sangawi: It is not at all true. There were a number of Peshmerga members who absconded and started to get involved in party-related issues. According to the law, any soldier who absents himself for more than 7 days is considered as having escaped and thus he could be removed. That is all that happened.



Copyright, respective author or news agency , Niqash org Top Kurd Net does not take credit for and is not responsible for the content of news information on this page