Thumping his hand on the table, his voice rising, Joschka Fischer delivered the most memorable performance of his career as he took on the might of the United States administration and told them he was not convinced of the case for war.

The former 1960s activist - who once beat up a policeman in an anti-war demonstration - stunned the chandeliered hall at an international security conference in Munich into silence as he slipped into English to ensure his message would be understood by Donald Rumsfeld.

Mr Fischer discarded a speech which had been written for him, and referred instead to his own brief notes. In German, he referred to Saddam Hussein as a "horrible dictator" who had weapons of mass destruction and had bombed his neighbours.

But that, he said, was not argument enough for going to war. "My generation learned you must make a case, and excuse me, I am not convinced," the Green politician shouted in English while directing his gaze, teacher-like, over silver half-moon frames, at the United States defence secretary.

"That is my problem," he said. "I cannot go to the public and say, 'these are the reasons', because I don't believe in them."

Mr Rumsfeld maintained a grim face throughout, gazing at Mr Fischer through a tropical plant so that, as one observer put it, "he looked like a tiger in the jungle, ready to pounce".

The confrontation could go down as one of the defining moments of this crisis. But it was also, said commentators, a moment that ensured that American and German relations have little chance of recovering soon from their chronic post-war low.

The Democratic vice-presidential candidate, Joseph Lieberman, warned at the conference that the rift - recognisable even before the Fischer outburst - threatened the future of Nato.

That deepened with the news that Germany and France had hatched a secret peace deal for Iraq, even naming it "Project Mirage".

"If we don't reach an agreement we could see a long-term split in the union," Mr Lieberman said.

Amid an extraordinary series of public exchanges, Mr Rumsfeld - who last week lumped Germany together with Libya and Cuba - sought to convince the war doubters that German, French and Belgian attempts to delay war preparations, by calling for longer weapons inspection time and blocking plans to protect Turkey, were effectively bringing war nearer.

"If the international community once again sends a signal of uncertainty and again shows a lack of resolve, there is no chance Saddam Hussein will disarm voluntarily or flee - and thus little chance of a peaceful outcome," he said.

But Mr Fischer, a thrice-married lapsed Catholic, had just had a private audience with Pope John Paul II in the Vatican. The occasion had clearly bolstered his resolve to stand up to Mr Rumsfeld.

Outside the meeting in the mid-19th century opulence of the Bayerischer Hof hotel in central Munich, around 20,000 anti-war demonstrators led by the city's mayor - who had put half-page adverts in newspapers calling on citizens to demonstrate - braved heavy snow to ram their message home.

"War is not a video game," mayor Christian Ude of the Social Democrats told the crowds. "This moral uprising is necessary in order that many governments say no to war." He was speaking not just for the thousands in Munich, but on behalf of the 83 per cent of Germans who, according to a recent poll, consider a United States attack on Iraq to be unjustified. Yet the extraordinary element of Mr Fischer's confrontation with Mr Rumsfeld is that the foreign minister represents the pro-American wing of the German government.

He is also widely viewed as a better diplomat than his boss, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder. Despite having the support of the majority of his countrymen, Mr Schröder has been accused of isolating Germany by steering it into a cul-de-sac in his absolute resistance to military action against Baghdad.

Government insiders are increasingly hinting at a rift between Mr Schröder and his foreign minister, who had feared that Germany - currently a temporary president of the UN Security Council - would be forced into voting no to a resolution on Iraq, rather than opting for the more diplomatic abstention.