THE United States is recruiting Sunni Arabs to protect neighbourhoods across a wide area of central Iraq.

The initiative has generated deep scepticism among some members of the Shiite-led Iraqi Government, who fear the strategy could intensify already intense sectarian warfare.

The US military says it is not arming the new forces, at least initially, but in some areas tribal groups bring their own weapons.

At the weekend, in the ravaged Sunni neighbourhood of Ghazaliya, freshly recruited members of the local force were on display in new cargo pants and body armour during a visit by the US commander, General David Petraeus, and the US ambassador to Iraq, Ryan Crocker. Both made it clear the US saw the creation of the so-called Guardian forces as a major initiative to improve security.

The effort is loosely based on successes the US has had in Anbar, the desert province where Sunni tribes have been paid to ally themselves with US-led coalition forces in fighting insurgent groups.

In an interview in the back of a tiny shop in Ghazaliya on Saturday, General Petraeus said the US was pressing to set up Guardian forces in places where the tribes were not strong or prevalent enough to serve as a backbone of the program.

Iraqi streets are protected and terrorised by militias of all kinds, leaving the US open to criticism that it could simply be creating a fighting force whose loyalty to the legitimate government is open to question.

Some of the militias are loyal to the radical Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, some to other Shiite political groups and many to no one but local commanders. At the same time, the Sunni tribes have armed wings, and a wide spectrum of insurgent groups and criminal gangs also wield the power of the gun.

The Guardians could also be seen as natural targets for some Shiite militias, potentially generating violence even as they attempt to deter it.

Asked whether he supported the Guardian program, whether he thought it should be put in place countrywide and whether he thought it could improve security, General Petraeus replied: "Yes, yes and yes."

But he said the effort would have to be tailored to individual Iraqi neighbourhoods.

NEW YORK TIMES