“We are not necessarily weaker,” said Marina Ottaway, director of Middle Eastern affairs for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and an author of “Beyond the Facade: Political Reform in the Arab World.” “But,” she added, “after all these years and the money that we’ve spent, I’m not sure we’re coming out in a stronger strategic position.”

Indeed, Afghanistan has spiraled deeper into insurgency, perhaps irreversibly, as Pakistan stumbles toward chaos. The democratizing example Iraq was to have set has yet to show itself in countries like Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Syria, while American influence over them has suffered in ways that will take years to repair.

And then there is Iran. America’s nemesis for the past three decades has emerged as the Muslim Middle East’s unrivaled power, punctuating its ambitions and capabilities with the launch last week of a satellite into space. Its nuclear ambitions appear undiminished, as does its patronage of Hamas in Gaza and Hezbollah in Lebanon, making the Israeli-Palestinian conflict seem as intractable as ever.

“The collapse of Iraq — the army, the government — created a huge gap in security in the region,” said Mustafa Alani, a security analyst at the Gulf Research Center in Dubai, reflecting a broadly held worry among Sunni-dominated governments. “And Iran emerged, by default, as the power in the region.” Before American troops unseated him, Saddam Hussein, though isolated and crippled militarily, had been a comforting buffer to Iran, in the view of most of the Arab world.

What recent events like the elections have done is remove Iraq from the top of the list of crises Mr. Obama’s new administration has to tackle, and that alone might count for something.

Well before last year’s election in the United States, President Bush’s aides repeatedly said their goal was to make sure that Iraq would not be the first problem on the new president’s desk.

Photo

Now, it turns out, Iraq may have been pushed farther down on the list than they imagined. When Mr. Obama granted his first extended interview as president — to Al Arabiya, the satellite news channel based in the United Arab Emirates — he barely mentioned Iraq at all. In fact, he conspicuously omitted Iraq as he offered “a hand of friendship” in what he pledged would be a holistic push for regional peace.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I do think that it is impossible for us to think only in terms of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and not think in terms of what’s happening with Syria or Iran or Lebanon or Afghanistan and Pakistan,” he said.

As a new president, Mr. Obama has a new chance to refocus American strategy. Iraq’s contribution to that, if it has any, would be to become stable enough that an overstretched American military can free up forces to counter the Taliban’s resurgence in Afghanistan. There, the Obama administration has pledged up to 30,000 additional troops, even as the president’s envoys redouble diplomatic efforts in the region.

“With the Bush administration gone, the Obama administration is sending signals it is willing to start a dialogue” among the region’s leaders, Ms. Ottaway said. “And with Iraq seemingly more stable, it is possible that there could be some strategic progress.”

The still unanswerable question is what kind of Iraq the last American troops will leave behind.

Mr. Maliki is himself the leader of a Shiite sectarian party, but his crackdown on Shiite militias last year — followed by the provincial elections — has somewhat diminished fears, both here and in the United States, that Iran would dictate Iraq’s internal politics and external diplomacy. In fact, an emerging sense of Iraqi nationalism — which is acute among Sunnis, who deeply distrust Iranian influence — could restore Iraq’s historic role in the region as a bulwark against Shiite and Persian expansion.

Mr. Maliki, who lived in exile in Iran, is no longer perceived as a weak leader purely beholden to Iran. And Iran, at least for now, appears to have scaled back its overt attempts to undermine the nascent Iraqi government by supplying insurgent groups.

“There is the growing self-sufficiency and sovereignty of Iraq, whose leaders, including Iraqi Shia, have shown they do not intend for the new, post-Saddam Iraq to become a satrapy of its neighbor to the east,” Mr. Obama’s holdover defense secretary, Robert M. Gates, told Congress last month.

That does not mean that Iraq will become a satrapy of the United States either. As Iraqis become more assertive and self-confident, it seems far more likely that it will drift beyond a purely American-dominated foreign policy.

In last year’s negotiations over a new security agreement, for example, Iraq extracted concessions on political, economic and military control that President Bush had once opposed. Anti-Americanism also remains a potent force among the political parties that did well in the elections.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And Iraq might use its oil to draw itself closer to other powers craving access, from Russia to China to Iran. When Iraq begins signing deals for new oil fields later this year, American companies may not dominate the bidding, as critics of the war, and some defenders of it, once thought they would.

“I think the Americans are going too far to think that Iraq will emerge as a major ally in the region,” Mr. Alani of the Gulf Research Center said.

For the foreseeable future, Iraq will be preoccupied with consolidating political control and rebuilding its economy, shattered after six years of war and decades of repression before that. It remains fragile, with insurgencies still flaring in several provinces and internal rivalries (involving the Kurds in the north, especially) threatening to undo the progress already made. The provincial elections are only a preview of national elections later this year, when the stakes will be higher.

The war is not yet over, but the American part of it is not what it once was. Given the alternatives, today’s Iraq might be the best strategic outcome the United States can hope for.