Anti-war campaigners have begun a day of public protest across Wales against possible military conflict with Iraq.

Action started early in the day with a demonstration on the Menai Suspension Bridge in Anglesey during the morning rush hour.

Campaigners said the majority of people had been supportive of their aims.



This will not be a war for democracy - it will be a war to control the oil-rich and strategically vital Middle East - the majority of people in Wales oppose war

Teresa Goss, Stop the War Coalition, South Wales

Groups affiliated with the Stop the War Coalition - which is planning a massive direct action protest in London - have also mobilised nationwide.

They are opposed to action against Saddam Hussein - which the US and UK has threatened to take - and claim the governments are ready to fight a war for control of oil.

The protests come as the Welsh Assembly Government begins a security review after protestors stormed the debating chamber at Cardiff Bay to voice opposition to any military action.

Events for Don't Attack Iraq day are due to take place in at least 12 towns and cities across Wales.

Plaid Cymru MP Simon Thomas will deliver a 50,000-signature petition of opposition on behalf of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.

Large protest

Demonstration organisers have said theirs will be one of the largest anti-war demonstrations seen in Europe in decades.

The intention is to step up the pressure exerted on 28 September, when up to 400,000 joined a peaceful march on London to make their view clear.

With the government's dossier of evidence on Saddam Hussein's alleged weapons programme now published, ministers say threatening force is the only way to resolve the Iraqi crisis peacefully.

But the Stop the War Coalition and Muslim Association of Britain, organisers of the rally, say the dossier has increased public opposition to possible war.

"The majority of people in Wales oppose war," claimed Teresa Goss of the south Wales branch.

"This will not be a war for democracy - it will be a war to control the oil-rich and strategically vital Middle East.

"This protest will give them the chance to show their anger and concern at British and American plans for an attack on Iraq.

"We are encouraging people to take non-violent action, with demonstrations, teach-ins, film shows and other public events."

Security scare

Six protesters jumped on Wednesday jumped from the Welsh Assembly public gallery shouting and trying to tie themselves to the presiding officer's desk during an address by the health minister.

Speaking to BBC Radio Wales, one of the protestors, Andy Williams, said they it had been a symbolic act.

"A brutal war is about to be fought in our name, but the majority of people in Wales and the UK are opposed to the war.



All forms of peaceful protest against this war are legitimate

Andrew Murray

"What we were calling on the assembly to do yesterday was to start representing the majority of people in Wales by making an extraordinary statement condemning the bombing of innocent people," he said.

"It was also to invite AMs to join us in a demonstration [on Thursday]."

Chairman of the national Stop the War Coalition Andrew Murray supported the actions of the demonstrators.

"Really, all forms of peaceful protest against this war are legitimate.

"People will die as a result of this [war].

"I think people throughout England, Wales and Scotland will be taking similar action today to try to make the politicians listen," he said.

Plaid MP Mr Thomas said any war would be "a disgraceful stitch-up and the real aim is control over middle-eastern oil".

"The only moral basis for going to war is in international law and, to date, we've seen no justification for it," he said.

Web organisation

Protesters have organised action using various website groups. One based at Swansea University was formed in the wake of 11 September and numbers 128 members.

Students at the university have proposed an occupation of lecture theatres as part of an organised day of "dissent" dominated by anti-war speeches and lessons.

In Neath, campaigners will give a letter outlining their views to Welsh Secretary Peter Hain's office.

Posters, banners and placards are also likely to be seen at Cardiff, Bridgend, Swansea, Bangor, Llangefni, Mold, Holywell and Wrexham.