Soldier To Serve Prison Time For Role in Sergeant Matthew Gallagher's Death

By: Michael C. Bailey

Published: 03/30/12

Sergeant Brent McBride has been sentenced to four years, two months, in prison and will receive a dishonorable discharge from the US Army for his role in the death of Sergeant Matthew R. Gallagher of North Falmouth.

Standing before a military tribunal in Fort Hood, Texas, Sgt. McBride pleaded guilty yesterday to three charges filed against him following the June 26 shooting death of his roommate, Sgt. Gallagher. In his statement to the court, Sgt. McBride begged forgiveness from God and Sgt. Gallagher’s family, who were in attendance.

The charges—involuntary manslaughter, violation of a general order and dereliction of duty—were filed after Sgt. McBride shot Sgt. Gallagher in the head during a game of “quick-draw.” Sgt. McBride was originally facing a murder charge, which carried a maximum sentence of 12 years, but agreed to plead guilty to lesser charges for a reduced sentence.

The sentence was handed down following a 12-hour court-martial hearing. Sgt. McBride claimed that on the night in question, Sgt. Gallagher loaded pistols belonging to himself and Sgt. McBride, chambered a round in each and disengaged the safeties.

He said at one point Sgt. Gallagher pointed his pistol at him and asked, “What would you do now?” Sgt. McBride responded by pointing his gun at Sgt. Gallagher and pulling the trigger, firing the fatal shot.

Sgt. McBride told investigators that he did not know whether his pistol was loaded and claimed he had fired from a distance of six feet away, but the autopsy revealed that the shot was, in fact, fired at point-blank range; the muzzle was touching Sgt. Gallagher’s forehead when it was discharged. Investigators also found that, despite Sgt. McBride’s claim, only one pistol had been loaded.

Sgt. Gallagher, a Weymouth native, enlisted in the Army in 2008, and at the time of his death, was serving in the 6th Squadron of the 9th Cavalry Regiment of the Third Brigade Combat Team of the First Cavalry Division based out of Fort Hood, Texas. Sgt. Gallagher shipped out with his unit, which was based in the Wasit province of Iraq, in January 2011.

Sgt. Gallagher’s stepfather, James M. Ruggiero of North Falmouth, said this morning that he and his wife, Cheryl A. Ruggiero, are disappointed with the sentence and do not feel that justice has been done.

“We feel disappointed and totally and emotionally drained and we’re exhausted,” he said. “But from today, it’s time to go on.”

The sentence of four years and two months in prison does not equal the loss of their son, he said.

Mr. Ruggiero said that his wife was in Texas for the sentencing, but would return to Falmouth today. They have been grateful to the people of Falmouth for their support during this difficult time, he said.