Despite the pageantry of the ceremony, held the day after President Obama declared combat operations at an end in a prime-time address from the Oval Office, military officials have been concerned that a prolonged political stalemate could lead to a resumption of the bloodshed in Iraq, which has been sharply reduced from the dark days before a 2007 increase in American forces but is still not under control.

Recent statistics gathered by the United States military show that in the first 17 days of Ramadan, the Muslim holy month that began in August, there was a substantial increase in casualties when compared with a similar period during Ramadan in 2009.

There has also been a major increase in rocket and mortar attacks in the fortified Green Zone and at the Baghdad airport, according to Brig. Gen. Ralph O. Baker, the deputy commander of American forces in central Iraq. General Baker, who said there had been about 60 such attacks in the last two months compared with “two or three” in the preceding months, blamed a “confluence” of factors, including frustration over electricity shortages, the return of Iranian-trained militants and Iraq’s failure to produce a government nearly six months after elections, which the insurgents have sought to exploit.

The goal of the insurgents, he said, is to “further erode confidence” in the Iraqi government and Iraqi forces “by trying to portray them as weak.”

But in an interview, Mr. Biden played down the risk of a fresh round of violence, saying that the Iraqi military was holding its own and that it had taken the insurgents of Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia months to organize recent attacks.

“The reason why I think there is an uptick in the violence — and I seem to attract attention when I am in the Green Zone — is because this is a time when they have to try to make a statement,” the vice president said, referring to the insurgents. “But the difference is that there is actually a military that is able to function and provide security, notwithstanding the government hasn’t been formed yet.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Both he and General Odierno encouraged the Iraqis to form a postelection government, although Mr. Biden sought to cast the stalemate in a positive light. “Politics has broken out in Iraq,” he said in his remarks from the podium. But he added that the Iraqis had courageously voted in large numbers, and therefore “they expect a government that reflects the results of the votes they cast.”

Mr. Gates, who has taken a markedly anti-triumphal tone during the clamor surrounding the end of combat, said earlier Wednesday that history had still to judge whether America’s involvement in the war was worth the cost.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In subdued and reflective comments on Wednesday morning to reporters in Ramadi, the provincial capital of Anbar Province and the scene of some of the fiercest fighting of the war, he said that while American servicemen and servicewomen “have accomplished something really quite extraordinary here, how it all weighs in the balance over time I think remains to be seen.”

Asked directly if the war had been worth it, Mr. Gates replied, “It really requires a historian’s perspective in terms of what happens here in the long run.”

The war, he added, “will always be clouded by how it began” — that is, he said, on the premise that Saddam Hussein had unconventional weapons, which did not exist.

“This is one of the reasons that this war remains so controversial at home,” he said.

When the Obama administration drew up the plan to reduce American forces to 50,000 troops by the end of August 2010, military planners assumed that Iraq would have a newly elected and largely representative government in place. And although Mr. Obama’s goals for Iraq are less far-reaching than those of President George W. Bush — who envisioned a democratic Iraq that would ignite political change in the Middle East — the current administration’s goals include an Iraq government that, as Mr. Obama said Tuesday night, is “just, representative and accountable to the Iraqi people.”

In his speech, Mr. Obama noted that the last combat brigade left Iraq on Aug. 19 without a shot being fired. What he did not say was that in the days since, one American soldier was killed near Basra when his unit was attacked by “indirect fire,” the military’s term for mortar or rocket fire, and at least four American soldiers in Iraq have been wounded.

Despite the official end of the combat mission, officials say, fighting will continue. American Special Operations forces will continue to hunt for insurgents, along with Iraqi units. The six United States “advise and assist” brigades that are staying behind to train Iraqi forces, escort American civilian advisers and protect United Nations officials have all of the weapons and military capabilities of combat units. There is every indication that attacks by insurgents and Iranian-backed militias against American troops will continue, and the advisory brigades will have the right to defend themselves, with Iraqi troops if they are ready and willing, or by themselves if they must.

“Iraq can still be a dangerous place at certain places for very short periods,” Col. Malcolm B. Frost, the commander of an advisory brigade in Diyala, wrote in a note to the soldiers’ families. “We will move around Iraq fully protected in armored Strykers and other armored vehicles, wearing full body armor, and fully loaded with ammunition to deal with the enemy if/when they raise their head in anger against us.”

Colonel Frost’s brigade has the same combat and support soldiers as a combat brigade but has been augmented with 51 advisers. Since it arrived in Iraq in July for its advisory mission, two of its soldiers have been killed. Thirteen were wounded but were able to return to duty quickly.