Number of devices found in Iraq falls to between 12 and 20 a month, from 60 to 80 earlier this year

Iran has reduced the supply of roadside bombs to Iraqi militias, in another sign that it wants improved relations with the US.

American military officials said the use of armour-piercing explosives, or "explosively formed penetrators" (EFPs), had dropped sharply in recent months, indicating a strategic shift by the Iranian leadership.

General Thomas Metz, who heads the Pentagon office created to counter roadside bombs in Iraq and Afghanistan, said yesterday that the number of devices found in Iraq had dropped to between 12 and 20 a month, from 60 to 80 earlier this year.

"Someone ... has made the decision to bring them down," Metz said.

Asked if the elite Iranian Republican Guard Corps had made a deliberate choice to limit the use of EFPs, Metz responded: "I think you could draw that inference from the data."

Ali al-Dabbagh, a spokesman for the Iraqi government, agreed that Iran had curtailed its activity inside Iraq and said Tehran appeared to have concluded that a new security agreement between the US and Iraq posed no threat.

Roadside bomb attacks fell late last year after an Iranian pledge to Iraq's Shia-led government that it would hold back the flow of weapons. By early this year, however, the US was again accusing Iran of supplying EFPs.

"It is my opinion, it is the policy of the Iranian government, approved to highest level of that government, to facilitate the killing of Americans in Iraq," Michael Hayden, the head of the CIA, said in April.

US military officials have said weapons have been found with stamps showing they were produced in Iran this year. Besides EFPs, the military said it found Iranian mortars, rockets, small arms and other kinds of roadside bombs.

Iran has been making overtures to the US since Barack Obama won the presidential election last month. While Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Iranian president, took his time to respond to Obama's victory, he eventually sent a clear signal that he would like to see some kind of relationship between the two countries - if there are "fundamental and fair" changes from Washington.

"I would like to offer my congratulations on your election by the majority of the American electorate," Ahmadinejad wrote in a letter four days after Obama's victory.

Such conciliatory messages have been few and far between since the 1979 Islamic revolution led to a bitter breakdown in relations. Ahmadinejad's letter, while a characteristic jumble of political and moral hectoring, constituted an unmistakable attempt to talk to the next US president in a way that was not possible with George Bush, who included Iran in his "axis of evil".