Updated: June 06, 2013

U.S. Refugee Admissions Program

The U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) is an inter-agency effort involving a number of governmental and non-governmental partners, both overseas and domestically, whose mission is to resettle refugees in the United States. The U.S. Department of State’s (DOS) Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration (PRM) has overall management responsibility for the USRAP and has the lead in proposing admissions numbers and processing priorities.

Within the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) has responsibility for interviewing refugee applicants and adjudicating applications for refugee status. Through its cooperative agreements with Resettlement Support Centers (RSC), PRM handles the intake of refugee referrals from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), U.S. embassies, and certain non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as well as the prescreening of cases and the out-processing of individuals for travel to the United States.

Iraqi Refugee Processing

Part of the humanitarian mission of the USRAP is to provide resettlement opportunities to especially vulnerable Iraqi refugees. Since large-scale Iraqi refugee processing was announced in February 2007, DHS and DOS have worked cooperatively to increase the number of Iraqi refugees admitted to the United States as part of the worldwide commitment. DHS and DOS have worked closely to expand processing capacity for Iraqi refugee applicants while ensuring the highest level of security. In support of these efforts, USCIS currently deploys approximately 55 officers per quarter to the Middle East to conduct refugee processing circuit rides. Since the inception of the program in 2007, 203,321 Iraqi nationals have been referred to the USRAP for resettlement to the United States. USCIS has interviewed 142,670 Iraqi refugee applicants; approved 119,202 for resettlement and, 84,902 Iraqi refugees have arrived in the United States.

FY 2007 FY 2008 FY 2009 FY 2010 FY 2011 *FY 2012 *FY 2013 *TOTAL Referrals to USRAP 12,098 28,769 49,276 46,472 39,878 15,878 10,950 203,321 USCIS Interviews 4,437 23,862 29,096 27,277 26,831 20,073 11,094 142,670 Approved by USCIS 2,909 18,674 25,238 24,021 22,323 16,992 9,045 119,202 Admitted to US 1,608 13,823 18,838 18,016 9,388 12,163 11,066 84,902

*as of April 30, 2013

Process for Resettlement

In identifying Iraqi cases for referral to the USRAP, UNHCR and DOS have been prioritizing 11 categories of especially vulnerable refugees, including individuals who are affiliated with the U.S. government and religious minorities, among others.

Iraqi refugees may gain access to this program through referrals from UNHCR, a U.S. Embassy, or certain NGOs. In addition, Iraqi nationals who worked for the U.S. government, a U.S. contractor, or a U.S.-based media organization or NGO, and their family members can apply directly to the USRAP in Jordan, Egypt and Iraq without a UNHCR referral. Iraqi applicants will also be considered for resettlement if an eligible family member applies on their behalf in the United States by filing Form I-130, a Petition for Alien Relative. These latter two categories – direct application cases and Form I-130 beneficiaries – are known as Priority 2 (P-2) cases. Before 2012, the majority of cases processed by the USRAP were referrals from UNHCR. Since 2012, P-2 cases have comprised a larger share of cases.

USCIS officers are currently interviewing Iraqi refugee applicants primarily in Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, Lebanon, and Iraq. Refugee processing in Iraq focuses on certain Iraqis who are associated with the U.S. and their family members. USCIS officers have previously interviewed Iraqi refugee applicants in Syria as well, but have not been able to work in Syria to process refugee applications since March 2011.

Determining Eligibility for Refugees

Eligibility for refugee status is decided on a case-by-case basis. A USCIS officer conducts a personal interview of the applicant designed to elicit information about the applicant's admissibility and claim for refugee status. During the interview, the officer confirms the basic biographical data of the applicant; verifies that the applicant was properly given access to the USRAP; determines whether the applicant has suffered past persecution or has a well-founded fear of future persecution on the basis of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion in his or her home country; determines whether the applicant is admissible to the United States and whether he or she has been firmly resettled in another country; and assesses the credibility of the applicant.

Ensuring Security

We are committed to conducting the most rigorous screening in order to ensure that those being admitted through the refugee program are not seeking to harm the United States. In May 2007, DHS announced and implemented an Administration-coordinated, enhanced background and security check process for Iraqi refugees applying for resettlement in the United States. The security check regime, including both biographic and biometric checks, has been enhanced periodically over the last several years as new opportunities and interagency partnerships with the law enforcement and intelligence communities have been identified. These enhancements are a reflection of the commitment of DHS and other agencies to conduct the most thorough checks possible to prevent dangerous individuals from gaining access to the United States through the refugee program. No case is finally approved until results from all security checks have been received and analyzed.

Procedures for Iraqi Citizens Currently in the U.S.

Iraqis currently in the United States, who are not able to return to Iraq because they have been persecuted or fear that they will be persecuted on account of their race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion, may apply for asylum with USCIS. Information on the process of applying for asylum in the U.S. can be found on our Web site: www.USCIS.gov/asylum.



Procedures for Iraqi Citizens Living Outside of Iraq

Refugees and asylum seekers should seek to comply with all legal requirements of the country in which they are located, including registration with host governments if required. In addition, all Iraqi asylum seekers located in third countries should register with the nearest UNHCR office.



UNHCR has the international mandate to provide protection and assistance to refugees and may be able to provide a protection document and possibly other assistance if needed. For a small number of extremely vulnerable individuals, this could include referral to the USRAP or another country's resettlement program. UNHCR will identify individuals for resettlement referral based on an assessment of their vulnerability at the time of registration.

In Jordan and Egypt, direct access to the USRAP is available to direct-hire employees of the U.S. Mission in Iraq and other Iraqis who worked for the U.S. government or U.S. government contractors, or for U.S.-based media organizations or NGOs and their family members. Any Iraqi, who has fled to Jordan or Egypt because of his/her association with the U.S., is encouraged to contact the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to receive guidance. IOM can be reached at IC@iom.int. Additional information is on the DOS/PRM web: http://www.state.gov/j/prm/index.htm

USCIS staff are currently unable to travel to Syria to interview refugee applicants. Iraqi refugee applicants currently in Syria may contact the local UNHCR office if they are in immediate danger or have concerns regarding assistance, protection, or resettlement. Iraqi refugees who decide to leave Syria should contact the RSC and UNHCR office in the country of their new location. USCIS will continue to process such cases in the new location.

Procedures for Iraqi Citizens Currently in Iraq

In Iraq, direct access to the USRAP is available to direct-hire employees of the U.S. Mission in Iraq and other Iraqis who worked for the U.S. government or U.S. government contractors, or for U.S.-based media organizations or NGOs, and their family members. Any Iraqi, who believes he/she is at risk or has experienced serious harm as a result of association with the U.S., is encouraged to contact the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to receive guidance. IOM can be reached in Iraq at IC@iom.int.

Additional information is on the DOS/PRM web: http://www.state.gov/j/prm/index.htm

Special Immigrant Visas for Iraqis

Iraqi nationals who supported the U.S. armed forces or Chief of Mission authority as translators or interpreters, or Iraqi nationals who were or are employed by or on behalf of the U.S. government in Iraq on or after March 20, 2003, for a period of at least one year may be eligible for Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) processing. The SIV program is separate and distinct from the USRAP. However, certain Iraqi SIV recipients are eligible for the same resettlement assistance, entitlement programs, and other benefits as refugees admitted under the refugee program.

Additional information regarding the SIV program may be found on the following pages;

Green card for an Afghan or Iraqi translator (SIV-1059)

Green card for an Iraqi who assisted the U.S. government (SIV-1244),

More information can also be found on the following Department of State pages;

Special Immigrant Visas for Iraqis and Afghans – Who Worked for/on Behalf of the U.S. Government (SIV-1244)

Refugee Processing Center - Special Immigrant Visa Program for Afghan and Iraqi Nationals