Few details about the attack were available. It occurred in an area with tight security. The Shiite-led government has mobilized thousands of troops to protect the pilgrims, who have been the targets of Sunni insurgents in the past.

The politician killed in the Mosul attack, Abdul-Karim al-Sharabi, was a high-level local official with the National Dialogue Front, a Sunni party that took part in last month’s provincial elections.

Mr. Sharabi was ambushed by gunmen and riddled with bullets as he drove to his office in the morning.

Photo

On Jan. 18, Hassan Zaidan al-Luhaibi, a leader from the same party who was in charge of its election campaign in northern Iraq, was killed by a suicide bomber south of Mosul. He was a prominent tribal sheik and a former army general during Saddam Hussein’s rule.

Mr. Luhaibi’s son Falah, a member of Parliament in Baghdad, said a man claiming to be with the Islamic State of Iraq, one of the most extremist Sunni groups, called him 10 days ago and told him that “the Islamic State of Iraq in Mosul has decided to start killing all those participating in the political process.”

This week, an official in Mosul with the Iraqi Islamic Party, which also took part in the elections, was killed as he left a mosque.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The winner in Nineveh Province, whose capital is Mosul, was a coalition of Sunni Arab nationalists known as Al Hadba, which ran on a platform of opposition to Kurdish influence. It garnered about 48 percent of the votes, according to preliminary results.

In another attack in Mosul on Thursday, a car bomb was detonated in the path of a police convoy in the city center, killing four police officers, a security official said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Despite multiple security operations by American and Iraqi forces, Mosul remains one of the most violent spots in the country. Four American soldiers and an Iraqi interpreter were killed in the city on Monday when a suicide car bomber attacked their convoy.

Sunni insurgents linked with Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a homegrown group that American intelligence says is led by foreigners, and others affiliated with Mr. Hussein’s former governing Baath Party are believed to be active in Mosul and Nineveh Province.

Hostilities between Arabs and Kurds and mounting tensions between the central government and the authorities in the neighboring Kurdistan region, who are accused of trying to increase their power in the province, also undermine security.

“This has allowed Al Qaeda to grow and fester in Mosul,” said Falah al-Luhaibi, the Sunni lawmaker.