Data Sources

The IFHS is a two-stage, stratified survey of households, with an original target sample size of 10,080 households. The originally allocated sample sizes for the Baghdad–Karkh domain and for Anbar and Nineveh provinces were increased by the addition of census enumeration areas or clusters before the survey fieldwork was undertaken: 6 areas for the Baghdad–Karkh region (a 33.3% increase), 54 areas for Anbar (a 100% increase), and 18 areas for Nineveh (a 33.3% increase). The addition of the census enumeration areas was done to compensate for the expected difficulties in accessing some of the selected clusters because of security problems. The additional enumeration areas increased the target sample size to 10,860 households located in 1086 clusters.

Because of different selection probabilities of households in the sample, design weights were calculated on the basis of projected population numbers according to province and stratum and were further adjusted for nonresponses at both the cluster and household levels. The sampling frame that was used in the southern and central provinces was derived from the 1997 census, which had been updated for the Iraq Living Conditions Survey 20046; the frame that was used in Kurdistan was based on information provided by the Statistical Offices in the region. Population estimates for Iraq for the survey period were projected by the Central Organization for Statistics and Information Technology. (For details on the survey design and implementation, see the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at www.nejm.org.)

All deaths that occurred in the selected households from June 2001 to the time of the survey were ascertained. The respondents were first asked whether anyone in the household had died during this period. For each death, data were recorded on sex, age at the time of death, the time and place of death, whether medical attention had been sought before the death, and the main cause of death according to the respondent. The interviewers coded the responses with the use of a list of 23 probable causes of death. (Additional details regarding the IFHS report are available at www.emro.who.int/iraq/ifhs.htm.)

Rates of Death

The rates of overall and cause-specific death were calculated with the use of information on the age and sex of household residents at the time of the survey, as well as the age, sex, and time of death of the deceased and the cause of death that was reported in the household questionnaire. Exposure times to the risk of death for both living and dead persons during the analysis period (January 2002 through June 2006) were calculated to the nearest month. The analysis period was divided into a pre-invasion period (January 2002 through February 2003) and a post-invasion period (March 2003 through June 2006). June was selected as the end month to allow comparison of the results with those of a previous survey that was conducted in mid-2006.4

Assessment of Mortality Data

Of the 1086 originally selected clusters, 115 (10.6%) were not visited because of problems with security. These clusters were located in Anbar (61.7% of the unvisited clusters), Baghdad (26.9%), Nineveh (10.4%), and Wasit (0.8%). Since past mortality is likely to be higher in these clusters than in those that were visited during the IFHS, we imputed mortality figures for the missing clusters in Anbar and Baghdad with the use of information from the Iraq Body Count on the distribution of deaths among provinces to estimate the ratio of rates of death in these areas to those in other provinces with high death rates. Data from the Iraq Body Count were used to compute ratios for death rates in Anbar and Baghdad, as compared with the three provinces that contributed more than 4% each to the total number of deaths reported for the period from March 2003 through June 2006.

For instance, we compared the ratio of the rate of death in Baghdad relative to the rate in three high-mortality provinces reported by the Iraq Body Count (3.08) with the rate ratio reported by the IFHS for the same provinces (1.56). To obtain the same ratio, overall mortality in Baghdad would need to have been 1.97 times as high as that in the three other provinces on the basis of the visited clusters only. This corresponds to a rate of death in the missing clusters that is 4.0 times as high as that in the visited clusters; the corresponding numbers for Anbar were 1.43 and 1.70, respectively (Table 1 of the Supplementary Appendix). This adjustment involves some uncertainty, since it assumes that completeness of reporting for the Iraq Body Count is similar for Baghdad and other high-mortality provinces. Since the Iraq Body Count did not collect information on age and sex for all deaths, the adjustment factors were not stratified according to these factors.

Adjustment for Reporting Bias

In general, the underreporting of deaths is likely to be common in household surveys. The most serious concern is household dissolution after the death of a household member. Several demographic assessments have suggested that there has been an underreporting of deaths in the IFHS. The application of the growth balance method,7 with the use of the age distribution of deaths in the population obtained from the household roster, indicates that the level of completeness in the reporting of death was 62%. However, this estimation needs to be interpreted with caution, since a basic assumption of the method — a stable population — is violated in Iraq. Furthermore, the comparison is not made to a rate of death derived from two successive censuses, as is usually done, but from the age distribution of the households in the IFHS.

Analysis of Sibling Data

The IFHS also asked female respondents between the ages of 15 and 49 years for the sex and survival status of all siblings with the use of the sibling history module developed by the Demographic and Health Surveys.8,9 For surviving siblings, respondents were asked for the current age; for siblings who were reported to have died, respondents were asked for the age at the time of death and the time period. These data were used to make separate estimates of rates of death that were specific to age and sex for the pre-invasion and post-invasion periods for comparison with the death rates estimated from the questions on deaths reported in households. The analysis of death rates among siblings was not used in the preparation of the final estimate of post-invasion deaths. Methods proposed by Gakidou and King10 were adapted to adjust for two forms of bias in the estimation of death rates from data regarding the survival of siblings. (For more information on the adjustment, see the Supplementary Appendix.)

For comparison, rates of death were also estimated with the use of microdata from the Iraq Body Count5 and from the 2006 study by Burnham and colleagues.4 These data were provided to the WHO by the principal investigators of each study. We used projected midyear population numbers that were adjusted for net migration to convert the rates of death into numbers of violent deaths (Table 2 of the Supplementary Appendix).

Response Rates

Table 1. Table 1. Final Disposition of Household Questionnaires, According to Region.

Table 1 shows the results of the household questionnaires and reasons for nonresponse, according to geographic region. Of the 9710 households that were visited, successful interviews were conducted in 9345 households, which represented a national response rate of 96.2% percent, including 95.8% for southern and central regions. Of the households that did not respond, 0.7% were absent for an extended period of time, and 1.1% of households were vacant dwellings. Only 0.4% of households declined to complete the questionnaire. Analysis of the level of nonresponse did not show significant differences according to the rate of reported household mortality.

Statistical Analysis

Rates of death from any cause and from violent causes were calculated. Robust confidence intervals were estimated with the use of the jackknife procedure,11 and all results were weighted with the use of survey normalized weights.

To estimate the most probable rate of violent deaths after the invasion and the range of uncertainty, we performed Monte Carlo simulations that took into account the survey sampling errors that were estimated with the use of the jackknife procedure and uncertainty regarding the missing cluster-adjustment factors, the level of underreporting, and the projected population numbers. We assumed that the level of underreporting was 35% (95% uncertainty range, 20 to 50), and its uncertainty was normally distributed. Uncertainty in the projected population for the post-invasion period reflected uncertainty in the total migration of 1.49 million persons (95% uncertainty range, 1.00 to 2.00), with an assumption of normal distribution. Uncertainty in the missing cluster-adjustment factors was difficult to quantify, since we assumed that the excess risk of mortality in missing clusters in Baghdad and Anbar was normally distributed, with standard deviations of 0.2 and 0.1, respectively. All analyses were performed with the use of Stata statistical software, version 9. All P values are two-sided.