BENICIA - About 40 anti-war protesters held what they said would be their final rally Thursday, six years after the United States-led invasion began against Saddam Hussein's Iraq.

Patricia Kneisler, who has led the Benicia Peace Vigil for five of the last six years of the conflict, said the weekly demonstrations on First Street and Military began to subside after President Barack Obama's election in November.

"People are really conflicted now," Kneisler said, explaining how many of the demonstrators felt they should not be protesting the war while Obama established his administration.

The Benicia Peace Vigil was begun by a group led by Danika Carter Cavulich, a member of the Solano Peace and Justice Coalition, with its first protest coinciding with the day the first bombs fell on Iraq.

Attendance has dramatically fallen from an initial group of dozens of people to, at one point, no one showing for the Thursday afternoon's rally.

In contrast to the recent sparse turnouts, about 40 de-monstators came to the vigil's final hurrah, which included balloons with peace signs, pickets and cheers as passing vehicles honked their horns in support.

RedBird Tate, who has lived in Benicia for 10 years, was among those who believes the protests should have ended when Obama was sworn in as president.

"Obama is my hope. He's going to kick butt and take names," Tate said, holding a sign and an effigy of former President George W. Bush, complete with faux flames.

Tate was also pleased by the young people who attended the rally. Among these were about a dozen students from a social justice class at Vallejo's St. Patrick- St. Vincent High School.

"People can resolve things in peaceful ways," junior Camille Enriquez, 16, said.

The students were allowed to choose a social justice issue, ranging from abortion to war, and then protest it. Several groups within the class chose to protest the war.

"We think it's unjust and unjustified," Dana Maccarone, 16, also a junior.

Thursday's final rally drew a boisterous crowd from throughout the North and East Bay, ranging from nearby Vallejo and Napa to Novato and Walnut Creek.

"We stand for peaceful resolution, not aggression," said Sandy Rappy, 68, of the Walnut Creek group Grandparents for Peace and Justice.

Based at Rossmoor Retirement Center in Walnut Creek, the group also holds regular demonstrations against war.

Though motorists and passing pedestrians generally supported the activities of the demonstrators, some did not.

On the opposite corner of the demonstration is Veterans Memorial Hall, where a handful of counter-protesters waved American flags and criticized the peace activists and their decision to stop the vigil.

"They should stay until the troops come home," said one flag-waving Benicia man, who declined not to be named.

• Contact staff writer Lanz Christian Bañes at (707) 553-6833 or lbanes@thnewsnet.com.