He said that the Turkish government was “in communication with” the United States and the Iraqi government, and that Turkey was grateful for “the strong, cooperative attitude of the Iraqi administration” and for “intelligence support and cooperation” from the United States.

Turkish television showed troops slogging through heavy snow in the rugged Kurdistan mountains. Casualty figures from Turkish sources and sources for the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, or P.K.K., have varied widely. Turkey has reported killing more than 150 rebels, while confirming the deaths of 19 Turkish soldiers. The P.K.K. contends it has lost only a handful of fighters, while killing 81 Turkish soldiers.

The P.K.K. demands autonomy for Kurds in southern Turkey and has been attacking Turkish soil from Kurdish bases in Turkey and northern Iraq since 1984. Tens of thousands of people have been killed in the conflict.

In an interview on Tuesday, a P.K.K. spokesman expressed confidence that the rebels had the backing of the Kurdish regional government, which has repeatedly demanded the removal of Turkish troops. But the spokesman, Ahmad Danes, said the rebel group felt betrayed by the United States, which has said Turkey warned it of the raid. He said the Kurdish rebels kept the mountainous north of Iraq free of insurgent terrorists.

“The U.S.A. must not stand against Kurdish rights,” he said.

In other violence in the north, an explosion on a crowded bus traveling to the Syrian border from Mosul killed at least nine passengers on Tuesday morning, Iraqi officials said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The source of the attack was unclear. Military officials said a passenger detonated a suicide vest on the bus, but bus company employees attributed the explosion to a roadside bomb.

The attack occurred about 500 yards from an Iraqi Army checkpoint in Tmerat, 50 miles west of Mosul, where scores of recruits routinely gather at an Iraqi Army base, said a military official who spoke on condition of anonymity. The bomber was probably trying to attack them, he said, and the bomb may have exploded prematurely.

United States military pressure — with the alignment of some Sunni tribes against the insurgency and a cease-fire by Shiite militias in southern and central Iraq — has pushed the remaining insurgents north to Mosul, United States and Iraqi officials say.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The city has been the scene of fierce fighting in recent months, and the Iraqi prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, promised a “decisive” battle with insurgents there after dozens of people were killed and more than 200 wounded in an explosion a month ago when Iraqi soldiers entered a booby-trapped building.

In other violence, a Mosul policeman was killed and two others wounded by a car bomb, Iraqi police sources said.

In Kirkuk, the district police said two Awakening Council members had been killed in an attack by unidentified gunmen. The police also confirmed that a roadside bomb had killed two civilians. And an Iraqi security forces source said an Iraqi Army major had been killed in clashes with elements of Al Qaeda.

In Tuz Khurmato, Lt. Col. Abdullah al-Bayati said attackers killed one soldier and kidnapped one of his relatives.

The American military issued a statement confirming that it had killed seven insurgents in a clash near Khan Bani Sa’ad in Diyala Province.

Also, the Iraqi Ministry of Information said gunmen had robbed a Health Ministry building in Al Waziriya in north Baghdad, taking six million Iraqi dinars, about $5,000.