Six in 10 doctors working in Scotland will not vote for independence in next month’s referendum, a poll has shown.

A survey for the British Medical Journal found that just 33 per cent of doctors believe that Scotland should break from the Union, while six per cent were undecided and one per cent will abstain.

The results suggest that the doctors surveyed are more staunchly opposed to independence than the overall population of Scotland.

Currently opinion polls show that around 37 per cent of the population would vote yes, 52 per cent no, and 11 per cent are undecided.

The BMJ’s survey was sent to 2,297 GPs, hospital doctors and clinical researchers working in Scotland.

Doctors were asked to assess how their views on seven specific areas influenced their voting: including the economy, the standard of health and social care and the state of medical research.

Nine out of 10 of the doctors intending to vote no said they believed the economy would suffer under independence.

One anonymised no-voter commented: “An independent Scotland cannot afford the current level of healthcare provision” while another felt that independence “would be very harmful for our long-term health needs here in Scotland.”

The majority also believed that medical research would suffer if Scotland broke from the UK.

In contrast, the most influential factor for the 104 doctors planning to vote “yes” was a view that people will get better healthcare and social care under independence.

Among “yes” voters, one responder said independence “could make it easier for Scotland to tailor health and social care to what is needed.

Earlier this year a group of eminent Scottish medical experts warned that independence would seriously damage research funding for Scotland's universities and medical schools.

An open letter from 14 experts, including senior staff from all five of the country's main medical schools, said they had "grave concerns" that Scotland's world-leading biomedical and life sciences research would suffer if the country "sleepwalks" into leaving the UK.

The letter, coordinated by Sir David Carter, a former chief medical officer in Scotland, said Scottish universities did disproportionately well out of the UK's research funding system and from the UK's charitable and medical foundation grants.

The group of signatories includes Prof James Garden, the Queen's surgeon in Scotland and a pioneer of liver transplant surgery, Prof Wilson Sibbett, the country's first chief adviser on science and Prof Jean Beggs, a respected geneticist. Three of the signatories have been knighted.