SNP leader says referendum will be held in 2014 putting Holyrood and Westminster on course for constitutional clash

The United Kingdom was on track for a grave constitutional clash on Tuesday night after Alex Salmond pledged to defy an attempt by London to block him from holding a referendum on Scotland's future on his own terms.

Within minutes of a declaration in London that any attempt to hold a referendum on Scotland's future without the blessing of Westminster would be unlawful, the Scottish first minister unveiled plans to stage his independence poll in the autumn of 2014, the year of the 700th anniversary of the Battle of Bannockburn.

"This has to be a referendum which is built in Scotland, which is made in Scotland and goes through the Scottish parliament," Salmond told Sky News. "If the Westminster government sticks to that, we won't have too many fights about it."

The chasm between London and Edinburgh indicates that Britain's pro-union parties – the Tories, the Liberal Democrats and Labour – are heading for an almighty clash with the SNP over the future of Scotland. It will arguably be the UK's most serious constitutional crisis since the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921, which led to the departure of the 26 counties of southern Ireland from the UK. The crisis was triggered when the Scotland secretary, Michael Moore, told MPs that the legal advice to the Westminster government stated that the Scottish parliament has no legal authority to stage a referendum in any form.

Moore said the UK government's law officers, including the attorney general, Dominic Grieve, had ruled that under the Scotland Act 1998, Holyrood was explicitly barred from passing any measure which affected the UK's constitutional position. If Salmond tried to stage a referendum, the UK government or private citizens could move to have it struck down in the supreme court as unlawful.

Moore used his statement to confirm David Cameron's announcement on Sunday that the UK government will grant Holyrood the legal authority on a temporary basis to hold a legally binding referendum. But an order under section 30 of the Scotland Act granting this power will only be met if Salmond agrees to two conditions for the referendum:

• Voters would be restricted to deciding whether Scotland should remain, or leave, the UK. This is designed to stop Salmond's attempt to inch towards independence by offering voters a third option known as "devo max". This is full-blown devolution that falls short of independence.

• The vote would have to be staged by a set date. This was not named in the consultation document published on Tuesday. But the UK cabinet believes that the poll should be held by the end of 2013.

Moore's document made clear that the UK government was prepared to stage its own referendum in Scotland if the SNP spurns the opportunity to stage a vote based on legislation passed in Holyrood under the temporary powers granted by London. "A bill to provide for a referendum could either be a standalone bill, introduced solely to deliver a referendum, or provisions could be included as part of a wider bill," the document said.

The Scotland secretary veered away from this politically explosive option in his Commons statement. He instead focused on his determination to enable a "legal, fair and decisive" referendum to take place.

He said: "As a Scot, I think it's vital that the Scottish people make a clear decision about our future in the UK; it should be a decision made in Scotland by the people of Scotland. But at present there is a lack of clarity about the referendum, its outcome and what the implications of that outcome would be."

Salmond dismissed London's approach as he defended his decision to hold a referendum on terms decided by Holyrood, where the SNP has a majority, in 2014. He said that 2014 "was the date that allows everything to be put in a proper manner on the most important decision in Scotland for 300 years. That date will allow the Scottish people to hear all the arguments".

Salmond's chief spokesman said they were "totally confident" that the Scottish parliament already had the powers to stage an advisory or consultative referendum, but said it would accept Cameron's offer of explicit legal powers to hold the poll only if there "no strings attached".

The spokesman said: "The terms of the referendum will not be dictated by the UK government: those days are over."

The first minister had earlier launched a withering attack on the move inspired by George Osborne to block SNP plans for a referendum staged on its terms. Salmond said: "The issue is the entirely unacceptable Tory attempt to impose London strings on Scotland's referendum, from a Westminster government with absolutely no mandate for these matters. In stark contrast to Westminster's disarray, the Scottish government will continue with the orderly process of bringing forward the referendum in the second half of this Parliament."

Johann Lamont, the leader of Scottish Labour, the largest pro-union party in Scotland, attempted to isolate Salmond by calling on him to set up cross-party talks with his opponents and civic leaders to agree a mutually-satisfactory referendum date. She accused Salmond of revealing the 2014 date in a panic. "The first minister should hold cross-party talks – including all quarters of civic Scotland – to discuss these details including the date," she said.

"It is also rather sad that a first minister of Scotland keeps his plans for the constitutional future of our nation secret, doesn't tell the Scottish parliament, but goes on the TV because a debate at Westminster might keep him out the headlines.

"We deserve better. This is about the future of Scotland, not the profile of Alex Salmond. This issue deserves calm consideration – not a panicked response from a panicked first minister."

But Salmond's hopes of staging a multiple-option independence referendum are likely to be significantly boosted by a new non-party initiative to campaign for greater powers for the Scottish parliament. The Guardian can reveal that a group of civic leaders, including senior figures in the Scottish voluntary sector, trade union movement, churches and business, are in the final stages of launching a new movement to campaign for a so-called devolution plus or "devo max" option for Holyrood.

Their initiative, due to be formally unveiled later this month, could greatly increase the chances of Salmond's referendum including a question on extending Holyrood's powers short of full independence if he presses on with the poll. He plans to publish a final bill setting up the referendum in January 2013.