An independent Scotland may refuse to accept its share of the United Kingdom's liabilities if London refuses to allow Edinburgh to form a sterling currency union with the remainder of the UK, the deputy first minister of the Scottish government has warned.

Hours before the launch of the Scottish government's 670-page white paper on independence, Nicola Sturgeon said a shared currency would be in the interests of Scotland and the rest of the UK.

The warning by Sturgeon came after the UK Treasury claimed Scottish voters would face tax rises of £1,000 a head after independence unless the next Scottish government immediately cut billions of pounds in spending.

In a calculated effort to undermine the release on Tuesday of the landmark white paper outlining the case for Scottish independence, the Treasury said the alternative, according to the most optimistic scenario for Scotland's economy and debt levels sketched out last week by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, would be to cut public spending by £3bn more than the UK government plans by 2021.

Sturgeon dismissed the warning by Danny Alexander, the chief secretary to the Treasury, as a ridiculous claim that came from the same stable that says people in an independent Scotland would not be able to watch Doctor Who. "The no campaign's assertions are becoming more and more bizarre and more and more outlandish the more this campaign continues," she said.

The pro-UK campaign, led by the former Labour chancellor Alistair Darling, says that one of the fundamental weaknesses of the pro-independence campaign is its support for a sterling currency union. In an earlier white paper on independence in 2009, the SNP described a sterling currency union as a first step towards membership of the euro. The SNP now rules out euro membership.

On Tuesday, Darling told the BBC it was "absolute fantasy" that Scotland could leave the UK and keep all the benefits.

Sturgeon hit back at the criticisms as she warned that an independent Scotland may refuse to accept its share of UK liabilities if the rest of the UK rejects a currency union. The deputy first minister told Good Morning Scotland on BBC Radio Scotland: "Sterling is a shared asset. The pound is as much Scotland's as it is the rest of the UK's. The UK government, in the wake of a yes vote, will want Scotland to take its fair share of liabilities. But that only works if we also get our fair share of assets."

Asked whether she was saying that an independent Scotland would not take on its share of the UK's liabilities unless a currency union was agreed, Sturgeon said: "No. I want to see an independent Scotland take on a fair share of liabilities. I am simply making the common sense point that assets and liabilities are two sides of the same coin – you can't have one without having the other. That appears to be sometimes what the UK government and the no campaign are trying to argue."

Sturgeon later told the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 that the "logical conclusion" of declining to allow an independent Scotland to join a sterling currency union would be that Edinburgh would not accept its share of the UK's liabilities.

She said: "It is not the scenario I am arguing for but it is the logical conclusion of the UK's position. If they say we [the rest of the UK] are the continuing state, we take all of the assets of the UK – remember the pound is a shared asset – then it flows from that that Scotland couldn't then be expected to take a share of liabilities. That is not the position I think we should be in, it is also not the position I think we will be in."

Sturgeon's remarks came after the pro-UK campaign intensified its warnings of the dangers of a currency union. Gordon Brown described the proposal in the Daily Record as "self-imposed colonialism" because Scotland would have less influence over monetary policy than it does as constituent part of the UK.

A UK government spokesperson said: "No one should vote for an independent Scotland on the basis that they will get to keep the pound. Independence means leaving the UK's monetary union and leaving the pound. The only way for Scotland to keep the pound as it is now is to stay in the UK."

But Sturgeon said a currency union would be in the interests of the UK as a whole. "Scotland is the second biggest export market after the USA for the rest of the UK [which] exports something like £60bn of goods into Scotland. Why on earth would a UK government after a yes vote want to force its own businesses into a separate currency against their will and against the will of Scotland?

"Our exports principally are oil and gas. Exports make a substantial contribution to the UK's balance of payments. If you take that out of the UK's balance of payments you deepen the deficit and that would be very damaging to the sterling currency."

She told Today the SNP had no alternative to a currency union with the UK.

"My argument and the proposition we are putting forward, as plan A, B, C or whatever is that a currency union is in the best interests of Scotland and the rest of the UK."

Jim Naughtie, the Today programme presenter, joked that Sturgeon had become "Tina Sturgeon" – a reference to Lady Thatcher's famous "Tina" declaration: there is no alternative.