Unionists who are terrified about the prospect of an SNP landslide in the general election must remember they can prevail if they “act together”, the founders of a new campaign that will give Scots the information to vote tactically has said.

The Scotland in Union group staged its official launch at a dinner in Edinburgh on Thursday night, with its organisers urging people worried the SNP will hold the balance of power at Westminster after May 7 to remember they are the “moderate majority”.

Alastair Cameron, one of the campaign’s founders and a former Army captain in the Highlanders, told guests the UK had survived “trickier situations before” and argued that if Unionists cooperate “we will see a victory of hope over fear”.

He said the group’s purpose was to promote the UK, not tactical voting against the SNP, but it would be “naive” not to provide information that would help Unionists decide which candidates in their constituency have a “decent chance of winning”.

The group’s launch came the day after detailed polling from Lord Ashcroft, the former Tory Party treasurer, suggested the SNP is on course to win a series of seats held by some of Scotland’s most high-profile MPs thanks to a massive 22 per cent swing.

Jim Murphy, the Scottish Labour leader, and David Mundell, the Conservative’s only Scottish MP, are both locked in knife-edge battles to hold their seats. In total, the Nationalists could win 36 of the 41 seats Labour won at the 2010 election, including those currently held by Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling, who are both standing down as MPs.

The Unionist parties have repeatedly warned their supporters not to vote tactically, but there have been reports from Conservative canvassers and activists that some of their traditional supporters are prepared to do the unthinkable and vote Labour in areas where the Tories are seen to have no chance of winning.

Scotland in Union was set up by former Better Together campaign activists frustrated by the Nationalists' refusal to admit their 11-point defeat in September’s independence referendum was decisive.

Speaking to 50 guests at the launch dinner, Mr Cameron said: “There are a lot of worried people in Scotland. They worry about the Nationalist surge – they may have experienced Nationalist intimidation first hand. They may see the SNP government influencing their business decisions.

“They may worry for the political future of the UK as a whole if Nationalists hold the balance of power at Westminster. To these people we say, ‘remember we are the majority’.

“Scotland, and the United Kingdom, have come through trickier situations before. In time, if we act together, we will see a victory of hope over fear.”

He said the group’s short-term aim was to “have some influence” on the general election result by promoting a positive view of Scotland in the UK.

Mr Cameron said it would not tell Scots who to support but would provide information that would allow them to vote tactically, if they so wished, for a candidate to “represent them positively in the UK parliament”.

The campaign’s medium-term aim is to have a “positive impact” on next year’s Holyrood election. However, he said its prime purpose of reinforcing the UK’s benefits would continue regardless of the electoral cycle.

Among the other speakers at the dinner were scheduled to be Jill Stephenson, Professor Emeritus of History at the University of Edinburgh, Colin Kidd, Wardlaw Professor of Modern History at the University of St Andrews, and Robert Clayton, an NHS surgeon.

The guests were expected to include potential financial backers. The group’s talks and research will be made available on the website www.scotlandinunion.co.uk.