Bob Geldof made an emotional plea to voters in Scotland not to break up the "family" at a London rally hoping to convince the country to stay in the UK.

At a public event for the Let's Stay Together campaign, organised by historian Dan Snow, thousands of people gathered in Trafalgar Square, waving union flags in a final attempt to persuade Scottish voters that the rest of Great Britain wanted them to stay in the union and to vote no in Thursday's referendum.

Comedians Eddie Izzard, Al Murray and Jenny Colgan and presenter June Sarpong were among the celebrities who took to the platform.

As the sounds of the song Let's Stay Together drifted across the square, Geldof addressed his speech directly to voters, describing England and Scotland as the "closest of cousins". "I'd just like to tell everybody in Scotland we're all fucking fed up with Westminster and it's even more frustrating for us because we don't even get to do the argument that you've begun," he said. "This argument needs to be had among us all, you can't selfishly resolve it amongst yourselves by taking an easy opt-out clause.

"Before there was a United States, before there was a United Nations, before there was a united this, that and the other there was a United Kingdom and it was an extraordinary meeting of very different minds of two extremely close cousins. And what a construct this thing is. Because Scotland is a feeling. England is a feeling. Wales is a feeling, Ireland a feeling. But the United Kingdom is one of the greatest ideas for the modern age. Between the native genius of the Scots and the pure pragmatic drive of the English we made a world beater. The pity of this is that we are the closest of cousins – when one of our blood spills then it all spills. There is such thing as a big glorious no. No is not always a negative."

Speaking after the rally, Geldof added: "Obviously a lot of people will be saying that we want to break up, but I just want to know why? The UK is a phenomenal modern idea, invented by the Scots. They invented our age and the 21st century really needs to be reinvented, which I think is at the heart of the argument. We are all fed up with Westminster but they've got an option and we should be able to work out, together, a new constitution. But breaking up one of the most genius ideas of the modern political times is not the way to go. 82% of people in England want Scotland to stay, that should show that this is a union that works."

As the crowds roared "let's stay together" in unison, Snow paid tribute to the important role Scotland had played in forming modern Britain and British society and said the "legacy of shared endeavour" between Britain and Scotland was evident even in Trafalgar Square.

Speaking to the Guardian, Snow disputed that holding the rally in London sent a negative message up to Scottish voters. He said: "Our opinion is that unity is better than division. Cooperation is better than competition. We've come here to London to the heart of our city, not to tell the Scottish people how to vote. We have no business marching round a Scottish city and telling them how to vote. We do what Brits have always done, we gather in Trafalgar square. When we celebrate, we commiserate, we memorialise as a nation, this is where we do it. What we want to do is for the rest of the United Kingdom to gather together and say please, when you are voting, remember one thing. We want you to stay."

Izzard echoed his sentiments: "We thought it was important for in Scotland to know what people outside feel about independence. It just seems to sad, and I say this to the people of Scotland, to break up our family and build a border. It's Scotland's choice. We cannot say anything to you other than that we do care. You are part of the United Kingdom family and we'd love you to stay."