Carwyn Jones, the first minister of Wales, has warned that the Welsh government would probably try to block plans by Alex Salmond for a new sterling currency union if Scotland voted for independence.

In a major speech in Edinburgh on devolution and the constitution, Jones said a formal currency union between a newly independent state and the UK would risk significant financial and political uncertainty and squabbling.

He said coping with a future banking collapse, similar to the crisis which required Alistair Darling, the then chancellor, to sanction a rapid multibillion pound bailout in 2008, would be far more difficult with two governments involved.

"I would be uncomfortable being part of a currency union where there are competing governments trying to run it. If there is a disagreement, who has the final say? This is a recipe for instability – and these things matter, particularly in times of crisis," he said.

The UK and Scottish governments would have competing economic and financial interests, but would have to agree strict fiscal rules for a currency union to work and slow down decision-making.

That could put Welsh and Northern Irish interests at risk. The eurozone crisis was clear evidence of how tricky those deals could be, he said.

Jones's intervention, only a few days before Salmond unveils his government's formal white paper on independence, is designed to marginalise the Scottish government by establishing how unpopular its independence proposals are in other parts of the UK.

It will be used by other anti-independence parties to put pressure on Salmond to explain whether he has a plan B for an independent Scotland's currency: economists assert that if the UK rejected a formal sterling union, the first minister could either try to use sterling regardless, and risk serious economic instability, or set up a new currency, again risking significant economic instability.

The Welsh first minister said he opposed independence, arguing that Scotland would be better protected by the pooled resources and shared interests of the UK, while the UK itself would be stronger. As part of the UK, Scotland shared in the truest and most efficient common market in the world, he said.

But Jones also put the pro-UK parties, including his own party, Labour, and the UK government under pressure to admit that Scotland and Wales needed further devolution of financial and political power, to allow both countries to develop distinctive policies within the UK family.

He implied that if Salmond lost the referendum, that would then expose different questions about the organisation and survival of the UK, where power has been devolved in, he said, an incoherent way.

The UK, he said, needed a formal, over-arching "territorial constitution" to manage further devolution in a more integrated way with consistent structures.

"To survive, the union must inspire people at a deeper level than short-term interests alone," he told an audience at Edinburgh University.

"It must demonstrate that it can accommodate and respect the devolved institutions and their authority and legitimacy. And it must appeal to a wider citizenship that supports every part of the UK."

Jones used that case to step up his demands for a new UK-wide funding settlement for the devolved administrations that was fair to both Scotland and Wales, repeating his argument that Wales is shortchanged by £300m a year by the Treasury's funding system for devolved areas, known as the Barnett formula.

Calling for a full re-evaluation of the union, Jones hailed the UK government's decision this month to offer the Welsh assembly new tax-raising and borrowing powers, but said the UK needed to have consistent ways of devolving power.

"I believe it is possible to work out a full future for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, through devolution, within the wider framework of a strong UK bound together by common threads of shared history, culture and values," he said.

He added later: "The direct and immediate accountability of the devolved institutions is the basis of the case for extending devolution wherever practicable. To my mind, democratic accountability means that, where there are no UK-wide interests, the devolved legislatures should be making the decisions."

The Scottish National party said Jones's calls for reforming the Barnett formula established that after a no vote, Scotland would find its UK funding cut heavily even though it paid more per head into the UK through taxation, if North Sea oil were included.

Linda Fabiani, an SNP MSP and former minister, said that was a "dismal" prospect. "Carwyn Jones has never been shy about his desire to change the Barnett formula in a way that would disadvantage Scotland.

"With a Welsh commission suggesting that Scotland's funding could be cut by a staggering £4bn in a single year, these are major cuts that are being proposed which would have a devastating impact on communities across Scotland.

She added: "With all of the UK parties lining up to cut Scotland's budget if there's a no vote, only the full powers of an independent Scotland will ensure that all of Scotland's resources are used to benefit people living here."