Delegates at the separatists’ conference in Inverness were at loggerheads over whether party policy should be changed to support getting rid of sterling at the first opportunity.

John Swinney, the Scottish finance minister, said a referendum should be held on the issue, but Alyn Smith, an SNP MEP, argued that this requirement be dropped because it was “too conditional”.

Some claimed an independent Scotland would suffer if the party’s stance was not changed, while others retorted the euro should be ruled out indefinitely.

Mr Swinney eventually got his way when delegates voted in favour of waiting until the economic conditions are right to join the euro, then holding a referendum.

Alex Salmond, the SNP leader, has said Scotland would keep the Pound following separation and even allow the Bank of England to set interest rates north of the Border.

The policy is one of a series of concessions, along with keeping the Queen as head of state, intended to persuade a sceptical Scottish public to back independence.

The debate was led by delegate Ian Blackford, a former SNP treasurer, who told delegates euro membership may be necessary for Scotland to argue in Europe for reform of financial regulation.

He said: “It is inevitable we will have to join. It is in our best interest to do so. If we are independent and tied to sterling, we will pay the price in higher interest rates while being exposed to a currency that has a history of suffering from wild fluctuations.

“Let us today take a clear decision to take an independent Scotland into the euro.”

He was backed by Duncan Ross, the SNP national secretary, who argued that the referendum proviso amounted to procrastination and “the politics of moral failure”.

“I cannot understand a position that says let's be independent but sterling is the best we can do,” Mr Ross added.

Mr Swinney said he is in favour of adopting the euro, but such a fundamental change would require a referendum of the Scottish people.

Mr Smith vehemently disagreed. He said: “I think we can be too conditional about what we want an independence Scotland to look like, too conditional about public opinion, too conditional about what sort of orientated economy we want to see.

“We are a Nordic, European country, currently part of a debt-laden subprime toxic assent currency we don't want to be part of and which is not serving our interests well.”