Relationships, says Rory Stewart, the Conservative MP for Penrith and the Border, are about respect, commitment and love. "Unless England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland love each other, then we don't have a country."

At a festive picnic for more than 400 backers of the union on Sunday afternoon – to the inevitable strains of bagpipes and assisted by volunteers in 'I ❤ Scotland' T-shirts, Stewart laid the foundation stone of a cairn that he hopes will become a symbol of that mutual respect and affection in the weeks leading to the 18 September referendum on Scottish independence.

The debate, he insists, "has been too much about politicians and celebrities and not enough about giving ordinary people the chance to show how they feel."

The picnickers had travelled from as far as Hertfordshire and as near as Dumfries. Stewart is inviting people from across the country to visit the field near Gretna, at the westernmost point of Scotland's border with England, to add their own stone to the cairn, known as the Auld Acquaintance, which he hopes will reach 9ft in height.

Although the broader pro-union campaign has been criticised for failing to make imaginative, emotional appeals, as the referendum debate winds down for the hiatus of Glasgow's Commonwealth Games, it is the no side that does so with greater confidence. Polling over the past few weeks has shown its lead solidifying around the decisive double digit mark, although a recent TNS MBRB poll did indicate a surge in support for independence among Labour voters.

But the Borders, a Liberal-Tory stronghold, is home to those the Better Together leader Alistair Darling described in a speech on Thursday as "the quiet but resolute majority of Scots". Four out of five residents told ITV Borders last month that independence would be a risk to Scotland's future.

Though the Anglo-Scottish border was legally established in 1237, making it one of the oldest extant borders in the world, the lands on either side were lawless, liminal territory for centuries, subject to constant raids by local reivers, or robbers, and existing beyond the authority of monarchs in either London or Edinburgh.

Across the border to the east coast, Berwick-upon-Tweed is the northernmost town in England and two and a half miles from the 'Fàilte gu Alba' (Welcome to Scotland) signs alongside the A1. Here, the porous reality and quotidian irrelevance of the modern border is evident.

Yvonne Scott was born and educated in Edinburgh, then lived in London before moving to Berwick 25 years ago to open a vintage clothing and bric-a-brac shop called the Treasure Chest with her partner. Her customers are evenly split between English and Scots, many of them holidaymakers, though she prefers Scottish notes in the till because they are more attractive.

"Some people say [independence] will be better for Berwick, that it would bring more custom and more employment because we'd be on a real border," she says. The practicalities of separation concern her: after a recent fall, she chose to attend Melrose General in Scotland rather than an English hospital further down the coast. "The roads to Melrose are better and I knew I'd be going back and forth for treatment. It's the same with schools: children are sent over the border if it's easier. We won't have that choice if Scotland is independent."

Around Berwick, there is similar bafflement at how and why enmeshed family, employment, and educational arrangements should be disentangled, as well as a prevailing conviction that this will not come to pass. But there is also the present peculiarity of looking a few miles north to free prescriptions and university education, and some hostility that Scots will be offered what one local described as "more perks" to vote no.

Further into the Scottish Borders, beyond the more prosperous farmland of the Berwickshire plain, are the towns of Galashiels, Selkirk, and Hawick, once home to thriving textile and microchip industries. They are now suffering the kind of poverty that may not be as visible as in urban centres such as Glasgow, but is still just as acute, says Kerry Gentleman of Women for Independence Borders.

Gentleman, who was brought up in Selkirk and works for Citizen's Advice, is aware that a pro-yes group like hers has its work cut out given the area's traditional, "small-c" conservatism.

"There's that sense of 'aye been': it's always been that way so why change it? It's also quite feudal" – the dukes of Buccleuch and Roxburgh remain significant landowners here – "and families have worked for them over the generations. So there's still a sense of 'tip your cap to the laird because he feeds you, and don't rock the boat'."

There is also a much fiercer sense of local identity in the Borders, Gentleman explains, typified by support for district rugby teams and the Common Riding festivals over the summer months, which may impact on people's attraction to a broader vision of national identity.

Jim Terras, chairman of Selkirk Conservative Club, notes that the unpopularity of the pro-independence campaign here may be partly demographic: older voters tend to support the union, and nearly 30% of the Borders population is aged 60-plus – six percentage points higher than the Scottish average.

The no campaign, driven locally by the Conservatives, has been slow off the mark, he concedes, and many habitual Tory voters are bemused by leader Ruth Davidson's sudden conversion to supporting greater tax powers for Holyrood in the event of a no vote.

Terras suggests the outcome is still far from certain even in these union heartlands. "There's a lot of uncertainty, and there are pockets of yes voters even in the Conservative club. It's not as clear cut as you might think."