“As I have said before, an idea never dies,” Quebec Premier Philippe Couillard said Friday in response to the Scottish referendum results. Photograph by: Jacques Boissinot , THE CANADIAN PRESS

QUEBEC — In politics, it's always a good idea to be careful which cause you hitch your wagon to.

So strong was the desire of Quebec sovereignists to jump-start the moribund cause here that they took the chance of grabbing onto the Scottish independence referendum as their own personal flotation device.

And while veteran péquistes were careful to say in advance that, Yes or No, the Scottish exercise would be helpful to their cause — Britain's behaviour toward Scotland was particularly significant — privately many were hoping for good news.

A Yes would have been that shot in the arm many needed to keep slogging through what former PQ leader Jacques Parizeau called this week the sovereignty "field of ruins."

Rosemont MNA Jean-François Lisée, for example, said a Yes vote would be a "shining example" for the next referendum in Quebec.

It was a closely watched event among sovereignists. Some PQ MNAs stayed up all night while other sovereignists rolled into a Quebec City pub to watch BBC feed the results to the planet.

In short, a Yes vote in Scotland would have gone a long way toward showing Quebecers the PQ is on the right side of history, that wanting sovereignty is still a normal, even modern, thing and they are not a bunch of dinosaurs.

Better still, the referendum process they propose to use to get there, which the Scots used as a model, is the right one and can work.

It was not to be.

What they got instead was a dose of the same Scotch mist that poured down on the dreams of Yes Scotland.

First Minister Alex Salmond stepped down Friday much as Parizeau did in 1995 when he failed to lead the people to the promised land.

By morning in Quebec, the interim leader of the PQ, Stéphane Bédard, the MNA for Chicoutimi, was on television to face the music. He did not flinch when asked if he was disappointed.

The answer was Yes.

"Their victory would unfortunately not have been ours and no more is their defeat," Bédard said trying to put a positive spin on the disappointing news.

Top péquistes took to their twitter feeds to do the same thing.

"You did better than we did (40 per cent) at our first try in 1980," Lisée wrote. "Keep hope alive."

"The Scots have demonstrated that independence is the issue of the century," said Marie-Victorin MNA Bernard Drainville, who vacationed in Scotland this summer.

"Obtaining it is demanding."

Bloc Québécois Leader Mario Beaulieu heaped praise on the Scots. Having been there, Quebec sovereignists feel their pain.

He noted over the course of the campaign, support for independence gained 15 percentage points after starting at 30 per cent support.

Still, there are some useful outcomes of the vote that the PQ can dine out on for the months and years ahead.

First, they will play up what they feel was the exemplary way Scotland's referendum took place, compared to the one here in 1995, where there were allegations of illegal spending by the No side.