Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles should be given a referendum on whether to become independent from Scotland, according to a new petition lodged with at Holyrood.

The islands' historic links to Norway mean it has a culture and heritage distinct from the mainland and justifies a separate vote, the document argues.

It suggests that a week after Scotland's independence referendum this September the islands' voters should get to decided whether to remain part of Scotland.

The electorate would be asked whether to stay in Scotland, become independent or – in the case of a Yes vote – leave Scotland but remain part of the UK.

"Whether you live in Shetland, Orkney or the Western Isles, you will know that your part of the world was once in Norway and still has its own traditions and culture which set it apart from the rest of what is now Scotland," the petition reads.

"A referendum will soon be held on whether Scotland should be an independent country. What better time to decide the status of each of these island groups?"

It proposes a vote on September 25, saying: "The UK Government decided not to allow any other referendum to be held on the same day as the Scottish independence referendum. But there is nothing the Scottish Government from deciding to hold these three referenda, in the island groups, a week later."

Catriona Murray, secretary of the group Referenda On The Islands (ROTI), said: "We have been overwhelmed by the amount of support.

“We have received messages of support from people with islands connections living in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Wales, England, and from one very enthusiastic 80-year old Shetland lady in New Zealand.”

“We believe that it is up to islanders to decide, and that now is the time to do so. Our own group includes supporters of all three options.”

Previously there has been heated debate over the powers oil-rich Shetland will have should Scotland become independent. The islands were part of Norway until the 15th century.

Tavish Scott, Shetland's Liberal Democrat MSP, wrote to the First Minister in early 2013 to say his constituents would “not simply be ignored, bypassed or trodden on” in negotiations with the rest of the UK to create a separate Scotland.

He challenged Alex Salmond to confirm the SNP administration’s policy towards the islands in the event of Scottish independence. Mr Salmond's spokesman said Mr Scott was "mischief making", adding that Shetland was and would remain a valued part of Scotland.