It's been a beautiful day in Scotland and polling has been brisk in what everyone is calling the most important election in 50 years. The only dark cloud has been this morning's press, which launched a savage attack on the SNP. There's been nothing like it since the Murdoch press took on Labour in the 1980s.

The Scottish Sun front page featured a hangman's noose in the shape of an SNP logo. "Vote SNP today and you put Scotland's head in the noose," it cried. The Daily Mail was equally direct: "This man wants to destroy Great Britain," it screamed over a picture of Alex Salmond, the SNP leader, looking shifty. The Daily Record, the second largest-selling tabloid in Scotland, ran a front page editorial attacking the nationalists. "Do not sleepwalk into independence. Do not let a protest vote break up Britain".

The fact that the result of tonight's election will certainly not break up Britain was hardly mentioned. Highly questionable assertions from Labour election leaflets were presented as if they were hard fact. Scottish taxpayers would pay £5,000 per head, said the Sun; income tax would go up 3p; thousands of jobs would be lost. None of these are credible claims. The alleged hike in income tax refers to the SNP policy of replacing council tax with a local income tax, which actually involves a £400 million tax reduction.

Similarly, claims that Scotland would be left defenceless, that Alex Salmond would create conflict with Westminster, that there would be a flight of professionals out of Scotland, are intemperate to the point of hysteria. It is the chancellor, Gordon Brown, who has said that he would refuse to work with Alex Salmond, should the latter become first minister. In all the warnings about Scotland being torn out of the UK, there was no mention of the referendum on independence which the SNP has promised before there would be any radical change to Scotland's constitutional arrangements.

You would have to be highly active politically to be able to see past such character assassination by the press. You would also have to have a sense of history. How many people reading the popular press in Scotland recall the way Labour was monstered by the same publications in the 1980s and 90s? Precious few, one suspects. Most people are rightly sceptical about much of what they read in the press, but when they unite in such extravagant forecasts of doom, many voters will certainly stop and think.

It has been a disgraceful performance by people I am ashamed to call my journalistic colleagues. It is an offence against democracy for the press to seek to influence public opinion by such blatant and crude propagandising - more like a tin-pot dictatorship than a modern democracy.

No one expects the press to be non-partisan. Of course they will advise their readers how to vote. But to use such intemperate language and imagery; to grossly misrepresent the programme of a major political party; to denigrate and traduce its leader, is simply the politics of the gutter.

What impact will all this have on the result? Hard to say - but it will undoubtedly influence some voters. The combined circulation of the three most vituperative titles is well over a million. These papers will be read by a majority of Scots voters. When the newsstands are decorated with lurid claims about Scotland being on the eve of destruction, portraying Salmond as a cross between Neil Kinnock and Joseph Stalin, voters cannot help but be influenced. We can only hope that in this unseasonallly hot weather, people have been sitting in the sun rather than reading it.

Read more about the May 3 elections in Scotland, Wales and England here