Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

WHEN I was Chancellor we rejected joining the Euro because we knew it would not work for any part of Britain.

In the past few years a fundamental weakness of the euro, that it is a monetary union with no fiscal union and no proper banking union, has left some of Europe’s economies cruelly exposed with unemployment 12 per cent and youth unemployment as high as 50 per cent in Spain and Greece .

So it beggars belief that central to the SNP plans for an independent Scotland that they will unveil on Tuesday is the imposition of the same discredited euro model on the economic relationship between Scotland and England.

Scotland and England would share the same currency but the current UK fiscal union and banking union would end, leaving us with an arrangement like the one that caused such instability within the euro.

If this plan is in the independence manifesto that they announce on Tuesday, then the interest rates that matter – for mortgages, jobs and standards of living – would be set by the rest of the UK but without a guarantee of any formal Scottish involvement.

The SNP will be selling us down the river, with Scotland less able to control its interest rates, its inflation and its money supply and these crucial elements of its economic future than now.

I cannot now be silent when the future of our country is at stake.

And I cannot say nothing when the future of my children is being betrayed in a confused, ill-thought patchwork and damaging scheme that threatens jobs and has been concocted, not out of conviction, or even our Scottish national interest, but for no other reason other than to prevent the SNP having to declare their support for a separate Scottish currency or joining the euro direct.

Under the SNP scheme, which they want people to think of as “no change” but is anything but “no change”, the Bank of England, now to be governed by England Wales and Northern Ireland but not Scotland, would decide not only the Scottish interest rates on which your mortgage and business borrowing depend, but also the money supply, crisis interventions and even employment targets so vital to our young people

And the inflation target – currently two per cent – which shapes and determines what the cost of borrowing will be for home loans or business investment would be set by the Parliament at Westminster from which, under the SNP proposal, Scotland has walked away.

So should Scottish people vote for independence, they would find they had far LESS control than they do at present over their own interest rates, money supply, employment targets and, in a crisis, any rescue operation.

Excluded from any say in Parliament they would be powerless to affect the Westminster decisions on the economy and the constitutional position of the Bank of England even when, all the time, proposing that the Bank has so much power over Scotland.

What it would mean for your taxes and public services

The absurdity is compounded by the SNP’s attempts to explain how policy on our taxes and our public and spending would work in an independent Scotland.

The respected Institute of Fiscal Studies explained how, with the falling value of oil revenues and the rising costs of pensions, the Scottish independent government would have to drastically raise taxes or cut spending further or do both.

But it gets worse. The SNP have had to accept that interest rate decisions depend in part on the tax and spending judgments governments make.

They know no monetary authority can stand by and allow fiscal policy to get out of control. So they now say that there would be some sort of “fiscal pact” between Scotland and the rest of the UK.

For years they’ve claimed that Scotland, once independent from the UK Parliament, would be entirely free to make whatever tax and spending decisions it wants. For decades they have been telling us that we have to free ourselves from the clutches of Westminster and Whitehall on tax and spending.

But now, in their panic over the unpopularity of a separate Scottish currency or joining the Euro, they propose a fiscal pact under which Scotland has to accept decisions on fiscal policy are at least, in part, dictated by the rest of the UK.

What the SNP propose is nothing less than a colonial relationship: Even with no Scots there, the SNP propose Westminster will make key decisions on Scotland.

A shared central bank?

The full horror of the SNP proposal is revealed when we start to understand how this new currency arrangement would have to work.

Interest rates would be decided every month by a Bank of England committee that was composed of members chosen to represent the interests of England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

SNP claims that Scotland will be be offered two seats on the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank is, at best, wishful thinking. With eight per cent of the UK population, they would be asking for 50 per cent of the external membership.

The Irish, Welsh and the English, who would under SNP logic have the other two seats between them, would not tolerate such an idea.

Worse still Westminster would continue to legislate on arrangements for the Bank, but there would be no Scottish MPs there.

Not only would these decisions about Scotland’s future be taken by non-Scots but the laws of the land would almost certainly make it clear that they would have to be taken in the interests of non-Scots

For years the SNP have said independence would give Scotland the freedom to plan its economic future.

They have railed against Bank of England decisions on inflation, money supply and financial rescues which they say are made without Scotland’s interests at heart and have complained time after time about interest rates set for the south of England and not for Scotland.

But they have now actually proposed that Scotland’s main economic decisions should be made by a Bank of England that will be more English than it is now.

An inherently unstable idea

Imagine the first time, in an independent Scotland, interest rates are raised by the Bank of England and these rises imposed on Scotland result in higher mortgage payments and business borrowing costs.

Do you really think Alex Salmond is going to say that a decision made in the rest of the UK for the rest of the UK is what he had envisaged?

Or is he not going to say we will have to reconsider the position on using the pound, either to have a Scottish currency or join the euro?

Quite simply the arrangement he proposes is a recipe for instability. Indeed he knows perfectly well that the plan is so unstable – Scottish decisions made in Westminster and in the Bank of England without the guarantee of a formal Scottish input – that it could not last.

Managing crises

Banks and governments have to work together to deal with banking crises. Central banks can provide liquidity but in the end only governments can call on taxpayer resources to stand behind banks and recapitalise them if needed. Sometimes with only hours to decide.

This works when a country has a banking and a fiscal union, as the UK does. It does not work well in the Eurozone. It’s not at all clear that it would work with the SNP’s plan of “two governments and one central bank” and an inevitably confused system of bank regulation. Who would decide how a Scottish bank would be bailed out?

When RBS and HBOS failed, it was the UK Government that stepped in but with Scotland independent, how could we expect English taxpayers to stand behind a failing Scottish institution?

All of this adds up to a plan for currency union that has all the problems of the Eurozone, magnified by the turmoil created by separation. No sensible independent Scottish Government would want it. The Welsh government has said they will oppose it. And of course a separate Scotland could not force the UK into a currency union against its will.

But driven by their political imperatives to remove the unattractive consequences of independence, nationalists still insist Scotland could successfully use the pound, even if the UK did not agree.

The case for devolution

Devolution, it is often said, gives us the best of both worlds – a strong Scottish Parliament in a strong UK.

An ability to act on our social and economic priorities without losing the strength of the UK, economically and internationally.

The SNP policy gives us the worst of all worlds on the economy. Scotland is being told it is independent but, because the SNP has stage fright over the currency, Scotland will have its interest rates, inflation target, iemployment objectives and much of its fiscal policy decided by the rest of the UK in the interests only of the rest of the UK.

The SNP tell us the currency union will remain and therefore we are voting for the status quo on monetary matters.

As I have shown however, there is a world of difference between what they propose for the future and what we have now.

And we would be worse placed, more vulnerable and less, not more, in control of key economic decisions.

For the reasons I give – that the badly thought-through SNPs proposals will end up in instability, division and a self imposed colonialism - the real way forward, as I will say in speeches over the next year, is not the abolition of the Union but its reform.