That's all from our coverage of momentous day in Scottish and United Kingdom history. But you can read the latest on the Queen's reaction to the referendum , from Gordon Rayner, while Peter Dominiczak reports on Alex Salmond's announcement that he is to resign as First Minister . If only he'd allowed Telegraph reporters to be there.

19.45 Christopher Hope has filed this video report showing the moment he and fellow Telegraph reporter Ben Riley-Smith were denied entry to Alex Salmond's resignation press conference

19.15 This Vine posted by STV's Peter A Smith gives a sense of the atmosphere in George Square:

18.45 Officers in George Square have formed lines to separate rival campaign groups and a police helicopter is now flying overhead. Flares and firecrackers are being let off by protesters.

18.30 There are reports that a friendly atmosphere in Glasgow's George Square is turning ugly, with sectarian chants between rival campaigners.

18.05 The Queen has said that an "enduring love of Scotland" will help to "unite us all", adding that Scotland's vote to remain part of the UK was "a result that all of us throughout the United Kingdom will respect".

Her comments came in a statement which she issued from Balmoral in Aberdeenshire, where she is on her annual holiday.

Here is the statement in full:

"After many months of discussion, debate, and careful thought, we now know the outcome of the Referendum, and it is a result that all of us throughout the United Kingdom will respect.

"For many in Scotland and elsewhere today, there will be strong feelings and contrasting emotions - among family, friends and neighbours. That, of course, is the nature of the robust democratic tradition we enjoy in this country. But I have no doubt that these emotions will be tempered by an understanding of the feelings of others.

"Now, as we move forward, we should remember that despite the range of views that have been expressed, we have in common an enduring love of Scotland, which is one of the things that helps to unite us all.

"Knowing the people of Scotland as I do, I have no doubt that Scots, like others throughout the United Kingdom, are able to express strongly-held opinions before coming together again in a spirit of mutual respect and support, to work constructively for the future of Scotland and indeed all parts of this country.

"My family and I will do all we can to help and support you in this important task."

17.55 Christopher Hope, the Telegraph's senior political correspondent, has filed more details of the SNP's refusal to allow several national newspapers into Alex Salmond's resignation press conference.

The briefing was held at the First Minister's official residence at Bute House, Charlotte Square, Edinburgh.

Two Telegraph journalists were barred from entering by a member of Mr Salmond’s press team, while other invited journalists were permitted to file past.

Asked why the First Minister’s team was banning journalists from a “public building”, an aide said “it is not a public building, it is a private residence”.

Along with The Daily Telegraph, journalists from the Daily Mail and the Daily Express were also not invited.

The Guardian did not send a reporter after the First Minister’s office attempted to nominate which reporter could be sent.

17.35 Alistair Darling, the Better Together leader, has also praised Alex Salmond, describing him as a "formidable political figure".

"He transformed the SNP into a party of government and delivered their referendum on independence which they had craved so long," he said.

"Today he has accepted Scotland's verdict, recognising that it is for others in his party to take the SNP forward.

"He has rightly said that the referendum was a once-in-a-lifetime event and that we all need to work to bring Scotland together.

"He can look back with pride on being the longest-serving First Minister and to the huge contribution he has made to public life in Scotland. I wish him well in the future."

17.30 David Cameron has issued a statement in response to Alex Salmond's resignation, praising the SNP leader's contribution to public life.

He said: “Alex is a politician of huge talent and passion. He has been an effective First Minister and always fights his corner. While we disagree profoundly about his goal of a separated Scotland, and many other things, I respect and admire his huge contribution to politics and public life.”

17.25 Nicola Sturgeon has said she could think of "no greater privilege" than to lead the SNP, moving up from the position of deputy leader to replace Alex Salmond. However she insisted that the decision was "not for today".

"The personal debt of gratitude I owe Alex is immeasurable," she said. "He has been my friend, mentor and colleague for more than 20 years. Quite simply, I would not have been able to do what I have in politics without his constant advice, guidance and support through all these years.

"Alex's announcement today inevitably raises the question of whether I will be a candidate to succeed him as SNP leader.

"I can think of no greater privilege than to seek to lead the party I joined when I was just 16. However, that decision is not for today. My priority this weekend, after a long and hard campaign, is to get some rest and spend time with my family. I also want the focus over the next few days to be on the outstanding record and achievements of the finest First Minister Scotland has had."

17.20 A number of Labour MPs have suggested that Gordon Brown's tub-thumping performance during the No campaign shows that he should return to frontline politics and lead the Labour party in Scotland.

One former minister who served under Mr Brown told the Telegraph: "He is one of the big beasts. He was curiously paralysed when he was Prime Minister and didn't seem able to be free as we would have liked him to be, which disappointed all of us who had supported him. It is good to see him back to his best."

17.10 Ladbrokes has given Nicola Sturgeon, the deputy SNP leader and deputy first minister, odds of 1/4 to replace Alex Salmond as leader of her party - making her the clear favourite.

17.00 Grant Shapps, the Conservative Party chairman, confirms that the Scottish powers may not happen according to plan - blaming Labour

Here's his statement. My emphasis:

"As the Prime Minister has said, we need a new and fair settlement not just for Scotland - but for every part of the United Kingdom. And we want to work on a cross-party basis to make that happen.

"But Ed Miliband's proposal would kick this vital issue into the long grass. If he is serious about delivering on our joint commitment to publish draft legislation on devolving more powers to Scotland by January, Ed Miliband must say whether he supports an equal settlement for England - English votes for English laws.

"Otherwise, it will seem that - just as he has no plan to deal with the economic challenges we face - Ed Miliband is too weak to take an important decision to secure Britain's future.’"

Here is that 'vow' that all three party leaders agreed just four days ago.

16.55 Scottish independence referendum: best of the internet jokes

16.50 Robert Colvile blogs: Alex Salmond falls on his sword – will his party fall with him?

The really interesting question now is not what happens to Mr Salmond, but to his party. Like Nigel Farage and Ukip, Alex Salmond was not the creator of his party, but its curator – the man who nudged it from fringe obscurity to mainstream credibility. And, like Mr Farage, he has given up his burden before, giving up the leadership in 2000 and instead representing the party's interests at Westminster.

In both cases, the move was not a success: it turned out that there was a certain alchemy, a certain charisma, that could not be recreated by their successors. The question, then, is whether Mr Salmond has done enough to turn the SNP from a cult of personality to a genuine governing party, such that he can leave it in the hands of, say, Nicola Sturgeon and see the party remain ahead of Labour without its internal contradictions once more coming to the fore. My money's on yes, for what it's worth, but it's not a move without risks.

16.40 Mr Salmond said that at the age of 59, after 20 years as SNP leader and seven years as First Minister, it was time to hand over the reins.

He said: "I think that's a reasonable spell of service and I think there is an aspect that you have to understand and recognise when it is time to give someone else a chance to move that forward."

"I made the decision this morning," he added. "I believed there was great possibilities in the campaign and obviously I wouldn't have made the decision if there had been a Yes vote.

"I believe in the circumstances the vote we have, galvanising, wonderful, empowering and massive though it is, it's my judgement that someone else in the leadership would be best-placed to take that forward to the summit."

16.35 Here is Alex Salmond's resignation statement

"I am immensely proud of the campaign which Yes Scotland fought and of the 1.6 million voters who rallied to that cause by backing an independent Scotland.

"I am also proud of the 85 per cent turnout in the referendum and the remarkable response of all of the people of Scotland who participated in this great constitutional debate and the manner in which they conducted themselves.

"We now have the opportunity to hold Westminster's feet to the fire on the "vow" that they have made to devolve further meaningful power to Scotland. This places Scotland in a very strong position.

"I spoke to the Prime Minister today and, although he reiterated his intention to proceed as he has outlined, he would not commit to a second reading vote by March 27 on a Scotland Bill. That was a clear promise laid out by Gordon Brown during the campaign. The Prime Minister says such a vote would be meaningless. I suspect he cannot guarantee the support of his party.

"But today the point is this. The real guardians of progress are not the politicians at Westminster, or even at Holyrood, but the energised activism of tens of thousands of people who I predict will refuse meekly to go back into the political shadows.

"For me right now , therefore there is a decision as to who is best placed to lead this process forward politically.

"I believe that in this new exciting situation, redolent with possibility, Party, Parliament and country would benefit from new leadership.

"Therefore I have told the National Secretary of the SNP that I will not accept nomination to be a candidate for leader at the Annual Conference in Perth on November 13-15.

"After the membership ballot I will stand down as First Minister to allow the new leader to be elected by due Parliamentary process.

"Until then I will continue to serve as First Minister. After that I will continue to offer to serve as Member of the Scottish Parliament for Aberdeenshire East.

"It has been the privilege of my life to serve Scotland as First Minister. But as I said often during the referendum campaign this is not about me or the SNP. It is much more important than that.

"The position is this. We lost the referendum vote but can still carry the political initiative. More importantly Scotland can still emerge as the real winner."

16.30 Salmond appears to suggest SNP will seek independence but not through referendums

There is a range of peaceful, democratic and legitimate ways to secure self governance for Scotland, he says. He stresses heavily that the referendum was won only the vow for further powers was granted.

16.05 ALEX SALMOND RESIGNS

Alex Salmond has announced he will resign as First Minister and SNP leader, with the words: "For me as leader my time is nearly over, but for Scotland the campaign continues and the dream shall never die."

Salmond will not seek the nomination at his party's conference in November. He will remain as SNP leader and First Minister until then.

He says "others are best placed to take this period of opportunity forward" to "hold Westminster's feet to the fire".

Scotland requires "new leadership", he says.

The future now belongs to tens of thousands of activists who will "refuse to go meekly into the political shadows," Salmond says.

He attacks David Cameron for refusing to hold a second reading of the proposed new devolution bill on March 22, following a phone call this morning. He suggests Tory MPs will block the promised new devolution.

The Scottish people will "speak, and speak loud", if the promised powers are not delivered. People will be "astonished" and "incandescent" that the "easy commitments are starting to be withdrawn" after the Tories and Labour split this afternoon.

Salmond claims in the phone call David Cameron called the Brown process that the PM signed up to a "meaningless process".

Salmond says if that timetable, and the vote for new powers, does not happen Scotland will not accept it. He says the Yes campaign are the "guardians of Scotland".

Salmond adds: "I continue to believe in Scottish independence. I shall do everything I can to contribute to that cause."

Asked if he takes responsibility for the campaign's failure, he says: "Any mistake made in the campaign is mine and mine alone." But he says the campaign went a "long way" in a short space of time.

16.02 The Tartan Army is fed up. Fans of Scotland's national football team have decided there is little point in singing Flower of Scotland, their anthem, at Ibrox.

One Scotland fan pointed out: "How can we possibly sing Flower of Scotland when it contains the ridiculous line of 'But we can still rise now and be the nation again'?"

Another admitted: "The anthem is completely redundant now."

16.00 The Daily Telegraph has been banned from the First Minister's press conference, Senior Political Correspondent Christopher Hope reports.

Outrageous. Two Telegraph reporters have been banned from the First Minister's Press conference. This is like a Soviet state. #indyref — Christopher Hope (@christopherhope) September 19, 2014

Alan Roden, the political editor of the Scottish Daily Mail, reports that the Mail and Express have also been excluded. The Guardian have boycotted the event after the Scottish Government sought to "hand pick" a journalist to cover the end.

15.45 The lottery winners Colin and Chris Weir, who donated £3.5 million to the Yes Scotland campaign, have called on supporters on both sides of the debate to “come together as one nation”.

The couple, who won a £161 million EuroMillions jackpot, said they were "deeply disappointed" by the outcome, but had no regrets about supporting the campaign.

They added in a statement: "Of course, we are deeply disappointed by the result.

"But the people of Scotland have made their decision and, as democrats, we accept the outcome.

"We have no regrets at all about our support for the Yes campaign in the last two years. As lifelong supporters of independence, we are very proud of what has been achieved.

15.30 Ed Miliband's counter-proposal for a constitutional convention is kicking the issue "into the long grass", Downing Street sources have responded.

Those promised powers for Scotland - set out in that Daily Record front page proclaiming 'The Vow' - within the time table set out by Gordon Brown could now be in question.

The three leaders agreed that the new powers for Scotland would be agreed by Burns' Night, with legislation ready for after the 2015 general election.

But Downing Street insists today it wants a "new settlement for the whole of the UK, not just Scotland" and that the "imbalance" between Scottish and English MPs must be addressed in one go. Many Labour MPs agree, Downing Street points out.

Mr Miliband is effectively trying to decouple the issue of England and Scotland.

15.20 LABOUR TO BLOCK CAM'S ENGLISH VOTES PLAN

Labour have rejected David Cameron's proposals to secure English-only votes on English laws at the same time as giving greater devolution to Scotland.

Labour sources indicated they would scrap Cameron's plans if the party wins in 2015.

A Labour source said: "We are not in favour of Westminster-led, rushed solutions to these issues.

"David Cameron failed to live up the occasion today. It did not call for a political gimmick. This was a moment for a considered response."

Instead, Ed Miliband called for a constitutional convention to address demands for wider devolution of powers.

The Labour leader said there needed to be a series of regional "dialogues" covering every area of the UK on how power could be dispersed from Westminster - including in England.

Among the issues he said should be considered are the reforms that would be needed at Westminster as more power is devolved to Scotland - including the case for a "senate of the nations and regions" or for codifying the constitution.

"The Labour Party will not now sit back and put up a 'business as usual' sign over Westminster. Nor will I allow this moment to be used for narrow party political advantage," he said.

"We need a response that matches the scale of this moment. That starts with delivering on our promise of further powers to Scotland.

"But other people in Britain, including England, now deserve the chance to shape their own futures with a dynamic devolution settlement."

15.10 Sir John Major has issued a statement, which could be read as telling Labour to put party above country and take some pain in accepting Cameron's English votes for English laws reforms.

MPs must give England, Wales and Northern Ireland greater self governance.

"The Referendum has delivered a clear-cut result that settles the issue for a very long time – perhaps for good. It has been a superb model of democracy in motion, and has shown the world that – however passionate and intransigent views may be – opposing factions can come together peacefully at the ballot box to make their voice heard," he says.

"An unbalanced Constitution cannot survive, and would create bitterness and resentment across the United Kingdom.

"No-one is more aware of this than the Prime Minister. Parliament must therefore take this unrivalled opportunity to re-fashion our Constitution, and offer devolved powers to all four Nations of the United Kingdom.

"This will obviously have repercussions for Westminster, some of which will be extremely uncomfortable for many Parliamentarians.

"This process is well above any Party politics. Our entire focus should be on what is best in the long-term for the nation as a whole. That is why the Prime Minister and all Opposition Leaders deserve our full support and understanding as they embark upon possibly the most important Constitutional discussion in our nation’s long and remarkable history."

15.00 Where's Salmond?

Journalists were told he would give a press conference at 10am. Then 2pm. Then 4pm. Only a select number of journalists from a select few publications are invited, apparently. There is speculation he will resign.

14.55 Meanwhile in Quebec, local separatists are digesting the lessons of the campaign and putting a brave face on the defeat for the yes campaign.

Writing in the Alliance Écosse-Québec page Amir Khadir, a member of the Quebec assembly, says: “Quebec will not get independence as a plaything of the political elite or from a PR campaign even if it has some media backing. To win against the forces of political inertia, media and economic interests, the independence movement needs a social effervescence that can only come from mobilising the people as a whole.”

This will, he adds, need to involve everything from rallies to discussions about local cuisine and artistic events.

Quebec rejected independence in a 1995 referendum.

14.50 Full story: Cameron signals radical tax upheaval after Scottish vote

David Cameron signals tax upheaval in wake of Scottish referendum



14.45 STATEMENT FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA

The White House has issued the following statement, congratulating Scotland for a "full and energetic exercise of democracy".

We welcome the result of yesterday’s referendum on Scottish independence and congratulate the people of Scotland for their full and energetic exercise of democracy. Through debate, discussion, and passionate yet peaceful deliberations, they reminded the world of Scotland's enormous contributions to the UK and the world, and have spoken in favor of keeping Scotland within the United Kingdom. We have no closer ally than the United Kingdom, and we look forward to continuing our strong and special relationship with all the people of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as we address the challenges facing the world today.

14.35 The Scotch Whisky Association has said it welcomes the "stability" brought by the referendum result.

"There must now be a renewed focus on improving the business environment so that Scotland's economy can grow to everyone's benefit," said David Frost, the trade body's chief executive.

14.25 Police Scotland has now confirmed that six people were arrested during the ballot and count for offences including alleged breach of the peace and assault.

However the force said that the process "passed off smoothly" and that these were "isolated incidents".

Assistant Chief Constable Bernard Higgins praised and thanked members of the public for their help and co-operation during the referendum campaign and ballot.

He said: "It is to everyone's credit that they remained calm on a day of potentially high emotion and co-operated fully with our police officers and also the staff at polling places on a day when record numbers turned out to vote."

14.10 It was the pound wot won it

New polling carried out by the Conservative peer Lord Ashcroft shows that the individual decisions taken by Scots were largely driven by concerns about losing the pound.

Some 57 per cent of No voters cited the pound as their motive, followed by pensions (37), the NHS (36) and public spending (32).

Among Yes voters, a huge 74 per cent cited disaffection with Westminster, then the NHS (54) and public spending (33).

Some 73 per cent of over-65s voted no - while 71 per cent of 16 and 71 year olds voted Yes.

Some have taken the news badly. Wings Over Scotland, an acerbic and popular nationalist blogger, writes: "Won't ever be able to look at a Scottish pensioner again without thinking "You. You sold us out.""

14.00 Scotland may be staying in the Union, but its status and relationship with the other nations of the UK is going to change significantly, as David Cameron outlined this morning. Here Holly Watt and James Kirkup outline some of the issues that need to be resolved.

13.45 Labour has renewed its call for the voting age at general elections to be lowered to 16 - the threshold adopted for the independence vote.

Sadiq Khan, the shadow justice secretary, said the poll was the "most important vote in [a] generation" and saw thousands of 16 and 17-year-olds voting. He questioned how they could now be denied a vote in next year's Westminster vote.

13.40 Labour has got to "step up and answer the question" of whether they support English votes for English laws, Michael Fallon, the Defence Secretary says.

"It can't be right that Scottish MPs can vote on things that do not affect English constituencies," he says.

He rules out the early recall of Parliament that Owen Paterson wants - party conferences are an important want of debating the proposals, he says.

13.35 The Muslim Council of Britain has welcomed the referendum result, saying it demonstrates "the importance of unity and civic participation".

Dr Shuja Shafi, its secretary general, said: "We can all learn from our fellow citizens in Scotland who have placed so much faith in the democratic process."

He added: "For the sake of all of our young people, I hope our political leaders make good their promise to reform our democracy and ensure that politics is not left to a privileged few in the Westminster village."



Yes voters party in Glasgow last night

13.25 Rydhses po mernans!

Mebyon Kernow, the Cornish nationalist party, says the NO vote reinforces the case for a National Assembly for Cornwall.

Its leader, Councillor Dick Cole, challenged David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Ed Miliband to support the creation of an Assembly and called for a "mature" debate on the future of the UK.

He said: "Mebyon Kernow wishes to repeat its call for a mature, respectful and wide-ranging debate about the future of the whole of the UK, all its constituent parts and how they are governed - with Cornwall at the heart of that debate.

"The people of Scotland did not vote for independence, but the No vote was underpinned by promises of additional powers for the Scottish Parliament from David Cameron, Ed Miliband and Nick Clegg.

"The three leaders of the Westminster parties claim that a 'stronger Scottish Parliament' would actually strengthen the basis of the United Kingdom.

"This has huge constitutional significance and it would now be hypocritical for Cameron, Miliband and Clegg to deny the opportunity of devolution to Cornwall through its own National Assembly."

13.10 John Swinney, the SNP finance minister, says he is disappointed.

"I have spent 35 years of my adult life agitating for independence," he says. He says it is essential that the UK Government sticks to the timetable of new powers by Burns' Night, as promised in the campaign.

13.05 INTERVIEW

Lord Barnett, the creator of the Barnett formula, tells Peter Stanford, that his formula is outdated.

Ex-ministers are usually proud of their political “legacy”, and defend it to their last breath, but no-one would be more pleased than this 90-year-old peer – still an active member of the House of Lords - to see his population-based formula scrapped.

It’s the first thing he tells me when I arrive at his home in Bury, north of Manchester, for what he says will be his only interview on the subject (he’s about to have major surgery on his spine). Indeed, I’m scarcely over the well-polished front door step when he’s eagerly pronouncing the formula “fundamentally flawed” for the simple reason it “wildly” over-estimates Scotland’s population and therefore gives Scots a disproportionate slice of UK tax revenues.

12.55 PRESSURE ON MILIBAND

A dejected 'Yes' supporter in Edinburgh makes his way home in the early hours after Scotland voted decisively to reject independence

Labour must get behind English devolution and attack the Barnett formula if it is to "survive" in the polls, Frank Field, a Labour MP has said.

"The most crucial thing is now the speed. The Prime Minister should now react and is reacting because he knows that if he doesn’t outpace UKIP then his vote is finished.

"It’s equally important but more immediate for Ed Miliband, our leader in the Labour Party, it’s crucial that in these couple of days Labour has got to appear as the genuine party of the English.

"If they don’t we’re going to have a generally election – they’re going to have two questions to ask for us. One is are the English now going to be treated equally to the Scots, will we have our own parliament or assembly?

"Our answer has to be very clearly “yes” to that. Secondly, every English candidate will be asked, in Scotland every individual gets £1,500 more in public spending than your own constituents. Are you going to ask for that to go on forever or are you going to phase it out?

"The answers must be yes to the first question and yes to the phasing out on the second, if we are to survive the polls. It’s only a problem for us if we try and defend the status quo which is now dead in the water."

Labour sources told the Telegraph that Cameron's plans to stop Scottish MPs voting on English issues was "nakedly political" that would create "two classes of MPs".

Addressing activists in Glasgow this morning, Mr Miliband said it was "a vote for change" from Yes and No camps.

He said: "Devolution is not just a good idea for Scotland and Wales, it is a good idea for England and indeed for Northern Ireland."

12.50 The United Kingdom as we know it is dead, Wales's First Minister Carwyn Jones has said.

The Welsh Labour leader launched a stinging attack on Prime Minister David Cameron - accusing the Tory leader of almost "sleepwalking" the country into disaster over the way his Government handled the Scottish referendum.

Mr Jones - who two years ago called for a constitutional convention featuring all four home nations - said the devolved governments must sit down together with the UK Government for talks as soon possible.

Speaking to reporters, the First Minister said: "We cannot escape from the fact that the Prime Minister almost sleepwalked us into disaster last night.

"Discussions now need to be had for a constitutional future of the UK.

"The old Union we know is dead. We need to forge a new one, but no more committees, no more messing about, no more panicky deals - it's time to sit together, all of us as four nations, and work this through.

"The UK has suffered a serious injury and a sticking plaster will not do."

12.40 More from the Telegraph video desk



Scotland votes No: the referendum by numbers





Scottish voters reflect on independence referendum

12.20 On the Daily Politics, Michael Fallon is asked whether he knew the content of Gordon Brown's speech on the devolution timetable. Fallon says he knew the "drift" of it beforehand. He cannot confirm that the plans were discussed in Cabinet.

People wait for the result outside the Scottish Parliament as voting in the referendum closes in Edinburgh

"I don't look at the exact content of Gordon Brown's speeches, I don't think he looks at mine," he says.

He says there is a "great deal of unease" over powers being granted to Scotland without "compensating" powers for England.

Nick Clegg is delighted by the prospect of more devolution in England. "Gladstone was campaigning for Home Rule back in the 1880s," he says.

"As a Sheffield MP I tell you people in Sheffield quite rightly say, ‘Well, if we’re having all this debate about more power and control moving to other parts of the United Kingdom, why not to Sheffield too?’ or to Manchester, or Liverpool, or Newcastle or to Cornwall?"

12.15 Bit more on the Russian view (see 11.55). Observers from the Russian Public Interstute of Suffrage have declare the referendum did not "meet international standards", according to state-controlled news channel Ria Novosti. The room in Edinburgh was too big, according to Igor Borisov, who complained that the West had "lectured Russia with a hoarse voice" on election rules and not met them itself. Hilarious, really.

12.05 REFERENDUM TROUBLE FREE

Police Scotland said that behaviour has generally been "excellent" over the past 24 hours with only around half a dozen arrests in relation to the referendum - mostly for "low level" offences such as breach of the peace. Two people were arrested after alleged assaults in polling stations in Glasgow.

It's an astonishing turn of events. Not only because within the past decade the West of Scotland was blighted by very high levels of so-called recreational violence, often including knives, often relating to youth gangs.

Consider Northern Ireland. Ukraine. Biafra. South Africa. The American Civil War. The partition of India. The Balkans. China in the 1980s. Scotland for much of the past 700 years. And so on.

Independence is a frequently bloody affair. In the sweep of history, very few countries have been able to walk to the brink of overturning a government and breaking themselves up and back again without violence.

12.00 Growing pressure from Labour MPs for Miliband to accept devolution

Former Welsh secretary and Neath MP Peter Hain - who helped extend the scope of Wales's devolution with the 2006 Government of Wales Act while a Cabinet minister - said political parties had to accept there was a strong mandate for "greater federalism" in the UK.

He said: "For decades now the Celtic nations have been calling for greater devolution and the English regions like Cornwall and the North are reigniting their desire for greater autonomy.

"People throughout the UK will not stand for inertia from Whitehall and the House of Commons any longer.

"This referendum has woken up political engagement in the UK and that is something to be celebrated, it's absolutely vital that we take heed of that but it's what all of Britain, regardless of political creed, wants."

12.00 Good afternoon. Scotland has voted; the Union is safe. For live coverage of results night from the previous 24 hours see the archived liveblog here.