Both political opponents and allies of Scottish government say pledge to join Nato is at odds with stance on nuclear disarmamant

Alex Salmond's government has been accused of misleading voters over the viability of its plans for joining Nato, while also closing down the Trident nuclear base by both his political opponents and his allies.

The Scottish government found itself under attack from two fronts after the Guardian revealed that senior Nato officials had warned Scottish civil servants that an independent Scotland would be unable to join the alliance if there was a dispute over the future of the Faslane submarine base near Glasgow.

Salmond has insisted that if he wins next year's independence referendum, the Ediburgh government will apply to join Nato while simultaneously starting talks with the UK government to urgently remove Trident weapons from Faslane, surviving a major revolt on the issue at last year's SNP conference.

The first minister said Faslane would instead become a conventional naval base. But his pledge to force out Trident is being vigorously opposed by the UK government, in part because of the immense cost and time needed to build a new nuclear port in England or Wales.

On a fact-finding mission to Nato headquarters last month, Scottish officials were told that aspiring members would be barred from joining Nato if there were ongoing territorial or military disputes with its neighbours, or if there was a threat to Nato's pro-nuclear policies.

Ruth Davidson, the leader of the Scottish Tories, and Willie Rennie, the Scottish Lib Dem leader, said the warning was a significant blow to the credibility of Salmond's defence strategy, which is designed to woo both mainstream and centre-left voters.

Davidson claimed the first minister "doesn't have a clue about defence issues", adding: "Defence of the nation is the first responsibility of any government, yet once again Alex Salmond has been caught playing fast and loose with the truth – making assertions without checking the facts."

Rennie added: "It is little surprise that Nato officials are concerned that an important part of its defence utility could be unilaterally undermined by one of its new members. [To] be a normal member of an alliance you should expect to comply with its rules, ethos and purpose.

"If the SNP want to ditch Trident they'd need to ditch Nato too. Leaving Nato would leave Scotland without the cornerstone of defence in Europe, potentially exposing us to considerable threats."

That criticism was partly supported by Salmond's allies in the pro-independence movement. Patrick Harvie, the Scottish Green party co-leader, said that Salmond and the SNP should consider reversing their pro-Nato policy before next year's referendum. This would strengthen the moral and political case for independence, he said.

"The prospect of removing abhorrent weapons of mass destruction from Scottish waters is a hugely compelling argument for independence; membership of an outdated, dangerous club is not," Harvie said.

"Scotland can play a peaceful and constructive role in the world, and by taking responsibility for foreign policy and defence we would be able to take a different approach, shaping a more positive future for ourselves and our neighbours."

Salmond fought off a major revolt within the SNP when his party's decades-long opposition to Nato was reversed at his party's annual conference last year. It is widely believed that privately Salmond and his senior colleagues know they would need to strike a deal with the UK after independence to allow Faslane to remain a nuclear weapons base as a condition of joining Nato.

Two anti-nuclear SNP MSPs resigned from the party over the Nato vote. One, John Finnie, now an independent MSP for the Highlands, told the Guardian he believed there was a clear and inevitable conflict between trying to join Nato while also promising to remove Trident from Scottish waters.

"The people of Scotland need a very clear understanding of what the position on the ground is, because there is an overwhelming desire to rid Scotland of nuclear weapons and that commitment can't be made with membership of a first strike nuclear alliance," Finnie said.

"There is no way that Nato will see [Scottish membership] as anything other than an opportunity to maintain a significant strategic base on the west coast of Scotland.

"It is for Mr Salmond to explain how the aim of being a member of Nato and riding Scotland of nuclear weapons could take place."

Angus Robertson, the SNP's defence spokesman and Westminster leader, insisted that Nato would welcome Scottish membership because of the country's significant strategic position and its proximity to the high north Atlantic and Arctic – areas where the Russians are keen to expand their influence.

Refusing to discuss the conflict over the future of Trident in Scotland, Robertson said: "Scotland is in a vital geo-strategic location for Nato with the Atlantic to our west, North Sea to our east and the Iceland gap to our north," Robertson said.

"A conventionally armed independent Scotland will play a key part in ensuring defence stability, especially with our northern European neighbours like Norway, Denmark, Iceland, and the rest of the UK."