The former Prime Minister said there was no “halfway house” that would allow Scotland to break away but have the English, Welsh and Northern Irish continue to underwrite its debts in a eurozone-style currency union.

Spain and other countries with separatist movements would be unlikely to “happily wave in Scotland” following an application to join the European Union, he also told business leaders.

Sir John was speaking the day after Mariano Rajoy, the Spanish Prime Minister, said Scotland would be kicked out of the EU if it voted for independence.

Mr Rajoy said Scots should be “realistic” about the consequences of a ‘yes’ vote next year as they would have to apply from scratch, a process that would take years with no guarantee of a euro opt-out.

His intervention directly contradicted the Scottish Government’s official blueprint on independence, published on Tuesday, which said Scotland “will continue as a member of the EU” on the same special terms currently enjoyed by the UK.

The White Paper, unveiled by Mr Salmond, also promised Scotland "will" retain sterling and insisted the Bank of England would bail out the country's banks again if there was another financial crisis.

But Sir John became the latest in a series of eminent politicians, including George Osborne, to warn that any deal to share the pound is unlikely.

Speaking at the Institute of Directors’ annual dinner in London, he said a vote for independence next September “would cut Scotland loose, and her loss would be felt across the UK.”

“In their campaign, the SNP assert that the pound sterling is as much Scotland’s currency as it is England’s. That is true now but not if Scotland left the UK,” said. Sir John, the Tory Prime Minister between 1990 and 1997.

“Independence means Scotland walking away from the UK and its institutions. This must include the Bank of England and sterling.”

He rejected Mr Salmond’s plan that the Bank of England continue to act as lender of last resort for a separate Scotland, saying this “cannot” happen as it would be answerable only to the UK Government and Westminster.

Sir John also said a currency union “will not” be agreed because it would mean the remainder of the UK underwriting Scottish debts. “There can be no halfway house; no quasi-independence underpinned by UK institutions,” he added.

Although he said a separate Scotland could adopt the euro, he said it would first have to join the EU. This would mean overcoming opposition to separatists among “many” of the existing member states, particularly Spain.

“Spain uses uncertainty over EU membership to deter Catalonia from even holding a referendum on independence,” the former Tory leader warned.

“It is hardly likely she would happily wave in Scotland. Spain will not be alone in being wary of separatist tendencies.”

He said Scottish voters need to realise the “chilly reality” of independence is small countries have little clout in the EU and they may regret the loss of “automatic British backing”.

However, he admitted that British standing on the world stage, including Nato and the UN, would also be harmed if a “large chunk” of the UK decided to break away.

Rather than Scots becoming “foreigners” or focusing on grievances, whether manufactured or real, he argued it would be “wiser to “celebrate what we have achieved together.”

More significant than the 700th anniversary of the Battle of Bannockburn next year is the centenary of the Great War’s outbreak and the 75th anniversary of World War Two, the 70-year-old argued.

“Many thousands of Scots fought and died in these conflicts. Would it not be a tragedy if, as we honour their sacrifice, we do so as separate nations?” he asked.

Meanwhile, Boris Johnson has argued that Margaret Thatcher would easily have defeated Mr Salmond and Scottish independence if she were Prime Minister today.

In a lecture to the Centre for Policy Studies, the Mayor of London said: “She would now be fighting like a lioness for the Union, and she would comfortably see off Salmond, as she saw off so many smart Alecs, because she would have instinctively identified the heart of the matter.

“This is about the demolition of Britain, about taking the blue background from the Union flag, lopping the top off the most successful political union in history.”

A spokesman for Mr Salmond said: "Sir John Major is quite wrong to try and claim that the rest of the UK should lay exclusive claim to all the assets of the UK, which the people of Scotland contribute to and of which sterling is one.

"But he is also just about the very last person the No campaign should be calling on to make their case – he was the Tory Prime Minister who presided over his party's complete wipeout in Scotland, and the more he tries to lecture the people of Scotland, the better it will be for the Yes vote."