Reaction has come in following the rejection of independence by voters in Scotland, with The Taoiseach saying that attention will now turn to the changes likely to take place following the referendum, particularly in terms of devolution of powers, which will be ‘closely followed in Ireland’.

Scotland’s First Minister Alex Salmond steps down following No vote in the Scottish Independence Referendum

Opinion: We must learn from the Scots and should hold Irish Government to account on lack of social justice

Around 2,608 polling stations opened at 7am and closed at 10pm on Thursday 18th September. The referendum question was “Should Scotland be an independent country?”, and turnout on Friday morning was around 85%.

Around 3,393,163 votes were cast out of a total electorate of 4,283,392.

Only 4 of the local government areas voted Yes, which included Glasgow and Dundee.

The No campaign needed 425,803 votes to win at 5.15am, with the BBC at 5.14am forecasting that Scotland had rejected independence. Edinburgh was 123,927 Yes, but 194,638 No.

The returning officer for Fife declared at 06.09am the 139,788 for NO, which took the Better Together campaign over the line.

Results

NO 1,914,187 (55.24%)

YES 1,539,920 (44.65%)

Inside Ireland.ie contacted two voters on the result.

Emma said:

“One side was always going to be disappointed. I for one am happy with the result. I am proud to still be British this morning and devo max is the best outcome”.

Luke told us he was ‘absolutely sick at the result, with ‘so many folks’ hopes and futures ruined’. “On the street, it really felt like it would be yes, it was in the air,” he told us.

“I was in the pub til 6am, then watched it at home, although we knew we’d lost early on. There are lots of activists devastated. I couldn’t believe Edinburgh (my city) voted No, let alone with such a margin. There was shocking media bias and employers telling people how to vote wasn’t exactly democratic. Everyone should have read the wee blue book! It was very much a grassroots campaign, not just SNP supporters. It was vibrant, progressive and inclusive. It will be a shame to see it off the streets every day.” -Luke The people of Scotland have spoken: Taoiseach

Devolution

In a statement outside Downing Street just after 7am on 19th September, the British PM, David Cameron said that it was time to answer the West Lothian Question with English votes on English issues. He said he had long believed that a crucial missing part was England, and now, the ’the millions of voices of England must be heard’.

Lord Smith of Kelvin will oversee the process of devolving more powers over tax, spending and welfare to Scotland, with draft legislation by the end of January.

Mr Cameron added that the rights of other people in the UK needed to be ‘respected and enhanced’.

The Leader of the Commons William Hague has been asked to draw up plans for what would be a fundamental change at Westminster – that only English MPs could vote on English matters.

The Taoiseach Enda Kenny said the people of Scotland have spoken. The Irish government respects their ‘democratic decision that Scotland should remain as part of the United Kingdom’.

“As neighbours, friends and partners across political, economic, cultural and many other spheres, relations between Ireland and Britain have never been stronger. We look forward to working with all parties across these islands in the years ahead.

The Good Friday Agreement of 1998 is the historic template for harmonious and mutually beneficial development of the totality of relationships among the peoples of these islands. In particular, it has led to a transformation in relationships between the two great traditions on this island”. -Taoiseach Enda Kenny TD

Sinn Féin’s Martin McGuinness called for a border poll in the North following the result of the referendum.

Mr McGuinness said the debate around the referendum ‘ensures that things will never be the same again for Scotland or elsewhere’.

‘Blocking progress’

The deputy First Minister said the NI Executive have ‘many challenges to face’ and ‘it is clear that there is a rump within the DUP of between nine and 12 powerful individuals who have been blocking progress in the Assembly.’

“But with agreement and a united front we can overcome those challenges.We have huge budgetary challenges facing us and Peter Robinson and I are in agreement that the decisions taken by this Conservative-led administration has amounted to a gutting of the block grant”. “There is agreement on a number of issues. All of the parties are agreed that we should have the power to set our levels of corporation tax.We will also be calling on the British government to transfer full fiscal powers to the Assembly. “We have to find agreement on what extra powers would benefit the people we represent.” -Martin McGuinness MLA

Unionists

First Minister Peter Robinson said there ‘is a sense of relief throughout the UK at the decision and I welcome the fact that Scotland has voted to remain within the United Kingdom’.

In Northern Ireland it is clear that more and more people want to maintain the status quo and whilst there is nothing to fear from that view being expressed, there are other more pressing issues the people of Northern Ireland would wish us to be focusing upon. Arising from the decision in Scotland the United Kingdom will change and there is a recognition among the main UK parties that the arrangements we have need to be changed in a way that takes into account present day realities. There is a desire for greater self governance and the recognition that this throws up anomalies as to England is treated. -Peter Robinson MLA

The DUP Leader said he spoke earlier to the First Minister of Wales Carwyn Jones and said both men are agreed ‘that this must be a matter for the United Kingdom as a whole, not for a Cabinet sub-committee after interaction with the Scottish Government’.

“Northern Ireland and Wales will want to be part of that discussion and to some extent we in Northern Ireland are ahead of the curve as there is already agreement on the need to look at the effectiveness and efficiency of how Northern Ireland is governed. We must also remember that Scotland is seeking to catch up with some of the powers that Northern Ireland has or is very likely to have. They do not have powers to deal with welfare issues that we have, and are likely to be seeking powers on areas such as Air Passenger Duty and Corporation Tax”.

Most Unionists supported the decision to remain in the UK. Ulster Unionist Ross Hussey tweeted:

“Well done Scotland – Scotland Says NO.”

While Jim Wells tweeted before the result was declared:

“Peter Kelner of YouGov says that he is 99% certain that the No Campaign has won. I hope he is right”.

Put public before party

As the debate over the new constitutional settlement for the UK gets underway, the Alliance MP for East Belfast said Northern Ireland’s politicians must ‘face up to their devolved responsibilities’.

Naomi Long MP has said that politicians must put public before party if Northern Ireland is not to be disadvantaged in any future discussions over the balance of devolution across the UK.

“The people of Scotland have made their decision clear and have chosen to remain within the Union, opening up the very real prospect of wider discussion around the balance of devolved powers across Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and in England itself”. -Naomi Long MP

“Our politicians must face up to their current devolved responsibilities, putting what the public needs ahead of their own party agenda,” added Naomi Long.