Shadow chancellor says nationalists want to dismantle the very things that make a shared currency work

Ed Balls has challenged Alex Salmond's plans for a new sterling currency union after independence, warning that the first minister's "strange" proposal is "difficult and uncertain".

In his first direct intervention in the independence debate, the shadow chancellor said that the first minister's plans for Scotland to set up a sterling zone with the rest of the UK after independence were seriously flawed and illogical.

Balls said the eurozone crisis had proven that a shared currency only worked successfully with ever closer political, monetary and economic union – the exact opposite of the Scottish National party's project.

He said the euro countries were now building a banking union "and much deeper and tougher fiscal rules and sanctions" to prevent future crises.

Writing in the Scotsman, he went on: "That's why it is so strange that the SNP project which seeks to dissolve the political and fiscal unions of the United Kingdom should suggest establishing a eurozone-style monetary union.

"Those very things that make a shared currency work – a truly integrated single market, common financial regulation and the ability to share-out tax revenues around the country to even-out economic imbalances – are what the nationalists would have us dismantle."

Balls, who would run the UK's talks on a shared currency if Salmond wins next year's referendum and Labour win the general election, also said that setting up a new sterling zone was a far more difficult process than the first minister admitted.

"The promise that Scotland would continue to share a currency with the remainder of the UK simply isn't one the nationalists can make. Sharing something requires both partners to agree," he said.

He then disputed Salmond's case that sterling is currently a shared asset on which Scotland has an equal and direct claim, as a constituent part of the current UK.

"A monetary system isn't an asset to be divided up between the two countries like a record collection after a break-up," Balls said. "The UK pound only exists through acts of the UK parliament. No legal or institutional framework exists for the sharing of the pound with another country.

"And it would require a very difficult and uncertain negotiation, with no guarantee in advance that an acceptable agreement could be reached for both the parties."

The Scottish government will dismiss Ball's warnings, arguing that its vision for Scottish independence would see continued close working and shared financial arrangements between both countries. That coalition would be in the UK's wider interests too, ministers insist.

Salmond and John Swinney, his finance secretary, acknowledge that allowing the Bank of England to be Scotland's central bank would give the bank influence over Scotland's fiscal and taxation policies, but dismiss their critics' warnings about the impact that would have on Scotland's autonomy.

In fact they insist that that move would give Scotland greater economic freedoms than at present, with significant benefits and flexibility. Salmond is also placing greater emphasis on an independent Scotland's capacity to control welfare, energy and industrial policy, even within a sterling zone.

The SNP is likely to directly attack Balls' credibility, linking him to the economic and banking crisis in 2008 under Gordon Brown's premiership, and the surge in the UK's debt while Brown and Balls were at the Treasury.

Balls said Scotland's future involved a "poor choice" between either setting up a separate currency, with all the economic uncertainty and traumas that involved, or allowing a foreign country, the UK, to control its interest rates, budget rules and financial regulation.

He echoed warnings by George Osborne, the chancellor, that voters in the rest of the UK would ultimately decide whether they wished to share the risks of a currency union with another country, competing for jobs and investment.

"Whatever currency option Scotland ends up with after an independence vote, it will be less advantageous than what we have across the UK today. There will be a big cost in terms of jobs, investment and living standards," he said.