A detailed study of defence in a separate Scotland predicted the SNP would face an “unpalatable dilemma” between keeping Trident submarines on the Clyde and being refused entry to Nato.

Admitting a new state requires the unanimous agreement of all the other members, the report noted, with Greece alone blocking Macedonian entry for several years.

While some existing members oppose nuclear weapons, the study said Scotland’s is an “exceptional” case because it is presently the home of a nuclear arsenal central to the alliance’s defence umbrella.

Academics, who conducted interviews with Nato officials for the report, said the Americans were “sceptical” about a separate Scotland because nationalist opposition to Trident would “erode” US interests.

A separate Scotland may have to agree to keep Trident in its waters in return for the remainder of the UK supporting its Nato application but such a deal was fraught with difficulties, they said.

The warning came after the report, published by a think tank called the Scotland Institute, provided a devastating critique of the failings of the SNP’s “fundamentally flawed” and “naive” defence policy.

Major-General Andrew Mackay, the British Army’s former commanding officer in Afghanistan, who oversaw the report, said: “What we now really require is the SNP to consider defence in an independent Scotland in a holistic manner and actually publish for the record what it would intend a Scottish defence force would look like.”

Simon Smith, a teaching associate in politics and international relations at Aston University, who specialises in Nato, said the US is currently not considering the implications for the alliance of Scotland separating.

But he added: “"Clearly they are sceptical of an independent Scotland pushing for denuclearisation that would be seen to be eroding or affecting US strategic interests.”

The Nationalists have claimed they would spend more than the UK does north of the Border but the study said this boast was “fundamentally flawed” as it assumes only servicemen based in Scotland help defend the country.

Their £2.5 billion proposed defence budget is not enough to provide the armed forces they want and assumes they will have access to the UK’s defence infrastructure currently based north of the Border, the report warned.

Although other Northern European nations such as Norway and Denmark spend comparable amounts on defence, they have built up their capabilities over decades whereas a separate Scotland would have to start from scratch.

“The Danish and Norwegian air forces are at levels totally unsustainable for Scotland. Norway possesses at present 58F-16 jet fighters and Denmark 30, the report said.

“Norway is due to replace these planes with a fleet of 52F-35 Joint-Strike Fighters by 2024 at an estimated cost of some $10.65 billion (£6.9 billion).”

Sir Menzies Campbell, the former Liberal Democrat leader, said: “This comprehensive report effectively torpedoes the SNP's defence proposals. It provides answers to all the questions which the SNP consistently dodges.”

The Scottish Government said the country will have "first-class" conventional forces.