Chief counting officer reassures Scotland's voters that everybody who wants to vote will be able to with record turnout expected

The chief counting officer for the Scottish independence referendum has pledged to ensure that "everybody who wants to vote can vote", as unprecedented numbers prepare to cast their ballots on Thursday.

"There will be no barriers or impediments, and we want everyone's vote to count," Mary Pitcaithly told the Guardian, reiterating that she had "no concerns" about the conduct of the vote, after a Better Together source predicted "carnage" on polling day.

She emphasised that anyone who was queuing when polling closes at 10pm would still be allowed to vote. The law was changed in Scotland in 2012, and in the rest of the UK a year later, after incidents at the last general election when some voters were denied the chance to cast their ballots despite being in line at the cut-off time. She added that careful planning for a very high turnout meant that she did not anticipate long waits to vote.

Across Scotland's 32 local authorities, there will be 2,608 polling places in local schools and halls, with a total of 5,579 individual polling stations inside. In most areas, a maximum of 800 electors have been allocated to each station, a significant reduction in the allocation for an ordinary election in order to accommodate the expected numbers.

scotland voters 160914 WEB

Pitcaithly has advised voters to avoid peak times in the early morning and evening, but confirmed that additional staff will be allocated to help during busy periods.

Responding to concerns raised that a yes group in the Lothians was planning to march with a piper to their local polling station, Pitcaithly said referendum agents had clear guidance that there should be nobody impeding access, distributing leaflets or asking which way people were going to vote within the polling place or at its entrance.

"I recognise that in this referendum we have people who are perhaps not familiar with what happens and what the rules are," she said, but insisted that polling staff were trained and would work with police, if necessary, to avoid disruption. "There will be no potential for anyone to say that they tried to vote but couldn't get past the throng," she said.

Pitcaithly said she had been planning for a record turnout for some months and, while she would not reveal her own estimate, pointed to the Quebec independence referendum of 1995 where turnout exceeded 90%. Figures released on Thursday revealed that nearly 4.29 million adults in Scotland, or 97% of the potential electorate, had registered to vote on Thursday.

Pitcaithly encouraged voters to take care when completing their ballot to avoid accidentally spoiling their papers. The Electoral Commission has also issued guidance for newly registered and first-time voters. 109,533 16-17-year-olds have registered after being given the right to vote for the first time in the referendum.

Police Scotland said policing arrangements for the referendum were "well in hand" and would be "appropriate and proportionate". Police sources on Monday said there was no indication of serious concerns or extra activity around polling day aside from provisions already in place to deal with a high turnout.

Willie Sullivan, the director of the Electoral Reform Society, Scotland, said: "There are always points of tension between campaigners at any election, but let's not hype this up. We've looked at how to get people excited about voting for a long time. We should be encouraging people to celebrate this big event, and taking a positive view about the level of engagement."