The White House has congratulated the people of Scotland for their "full and energetic exercise of democracy". President Barack Obama said in a statement:

We welcome the result of yesterday’s referendum on Scottish independence and congratulate the people of Scotland for their full and energetic exercise of democracy. Through debate, discussion, and passionate yet peaceful deliberations, they reminded the world of Scotland's enormous contributions to the UK and the world, and have spoken in favor of keeping Scotland within the United Kingdom.

We have no closer ally than the United Kingdom, and we look forward to continuing our strong and special relationship with all the people of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as we address the challenges facing the world today.

Russia: MP says 'The Crimea referendum was much fairer'

Pro-Kremlin commentators and politicians in Russia have been at pains to draw parallels between the referendum in Scotland and the deeply-flawed plebiscite held in the Russophile Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea in March, which Moscow used as an excuse to annex the region, writes Tom Parfitt in Moscow.

Mikhail Emelyanov, an MP in the lower house of parliament, said on Friday that the vote in Crimea had been more honest than the one in Scotland. He told journalists:

In terms of legitimacy and the conditions in which they were carried out, the Crimea referendum was conducted in a much fairer way than the Scottish one. At least there were no power cuts, there was no fire alarm or halts in the counting of votes and so on.”

Mr Emelyanov, an MP from the Kremlin-friendly Fair Russia party, was apparently referring to a short break in the vote count in Dundee when a fire alarm went off.

Russian bloggers who had been vociferously supporting the Yes campaign appeared deflated on Friday.

Konstantin Rykov, a former MP and a supporter of Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, had styled himself as McRykov on his Twitter account and added a Yes sticker to his photograph. The badge and the Mc had disappeared on Friday. Mr Rykov tweeted a picture of Mel Gibson as William Wallace looking forlorn.

Oh, Scots, Scots,” he lamented. “Well, not to worry… in 300 years or so you can try again.”

Italy: The British "spirit" has been "wounded"

The head of the Northern League, a secessionist party that has campaigned for decades for greater autonomy for an area of northern Italy it calls Padania, said that even though the Yes vote lost the referendum, the result would have implications for the whole of Europe for years to come, writes Nick Squires in Rome.

"Even if the No's won this time, nothing will be the same as before in Europe or Italy from today," said Matteo Salvini, the head of the League, who travelled to Edinburgh for the announcement of the result.

"Thanks to the referendum, from today the Scots will have more strength, powers and money. Thank you Scotland, a splendid example of democracy, participation and pride," Mr Salvini, who is also an MEP, said on Facebook.

In contrast the Italian government welcomed the result, saying it would have been dismayed to have seen Scotland split from the rest of the UK.

"The Italian government, also in its capacity as duty president of the EU, hails the result of the vote democratically expressed by the Scottish people," said a statement from the office of the prime minister, Matteo Renzi.

Mr Renzi also sent a message to David Cameron, saying that Scotland had "recognised and appreciated diversity" without "fragmenting."

In a front page editorial, Corriere della Sera said: "With or without Scotland, the United Kingdom will be very different from today. The referendum will have important constitutional implications. And it will weigh heavily on the future of both the Conservatives and Labour. One chapter has ended but another chapter is just about to begin."

While David Cameron deserved praise for allowing the referendum, as a demonstration of British democracy at work, both he and Ed Miliband had "committed a grave error - they underestimated the pro-independence lobby and its ability to tap into nationalist passions."

Another leading daily, La Repubblica, in a two-page spread on the referendum, commented: "The eyes of Great Britain, of Europe and indeed of the world were on Scotland. And Scotland woke up this morning divided, more or less down the middle, regardless of who won."

The independence vote "threatens repercussions elsewhere, from Catalonia to Flanders, and even here in Italy."

"The United Kingdom will never be the same again," said La Stampa, one of Italy's leading dailies. What it called "the British spirit" has been "wounded" by the referendum, despite the Yes vote prevailing.

The prospect of Scotland leaving the UK had come just as the European Union has greatest need of Britain, said the Turin-based daily. "If Scotland no longer had a need for Great Britain, at least according to many voters, Europe needs Great Britain."

The counting of the votes had been "the longest night in the political life of David Cameron", who feared that he might be the last Prime Minister of a United Kingdom.

France: Scottish result a 'relief for Europe'

The French education minister, Najat Vallaud-Belkacem, said she was “happy that Scotland is staying” in the United Kingdom, writes David Chazan in Paris. Independence, she said, could have damaged the European Union. “We never like to see European nations break up,” she commented. “The opposite result would have been a negative signal. We’re at a time when we have to find ways to affirm our commitment to the European Union.

The minister’s sentiments were shared by other politicians, aware that Scottish independence would have encouraged Corsican, Basque and Breton nationalists to demand secession from France.

The governing Socialist Party’s secretary for Europe, Philip Cordery, said the vote was “a relief for Europe”.

“Relief” was also the word used by the centrist MP, Bertrand Plancher of the UDI party. “Dislocation of nations is the temptation of the century,” he commented.

Several French politicians expressed admiration for the way the referendum was held and the graceful acceptation of the result by the “Yes” camp. “Classy!” tweeted Jean Dionis, the centrist mayor of Agen, in south-western France.

Gilles Boyer, a close advisor of the mayor of Bordeaux and potential conservative presidential candidate, Alain Juppé, commented on Twitter: “We can take inspiration from the high standard of the referendum campaign.”

Many French people supported the Scots’ aspirations for independence on an emotional level, recalling the Auld Alliance between Scotland and France, which dates from 1295 and was formed to curtail England’s expansion.

However, the prevailing mood today is one of relief, partly because French media coverage of the presence of Corsican and Breton nationalists in Edinburgh brought home to many that a precedent set by Scottish independence would increase pressure on France.

Gilles Simeoni, the mayor of Bastia, in Corsica, said Corsicans should also be allowed to hold a referendum on their future. Speaking to Europe 1 radio in Edinburgh this morning, Mr Simeoni said: “We are a people like the Scots with our traditions and our identity and we should also have the right to decide.”

It is a demand certain to be rejected by the government of France, which has a long tradition of strong central control.

Germany: "Britain stays Great"

Scotland's rejection of independence dominates the German press this morning, with most papers welcoming the vote, writes Justin Huggler in Berlin. The mass-selling Bild's headline is "Britain stays Great". Under a headline of "New Start for Britain",

Spiegel says: Scotland No To Independence: New Start for Great Britain

"The British can rejoice, the Kingdom remains intact. Their partners in Brussels and Washington can breathe, Great Britain can continue to fulfill its international responsibilities."

It asks whether the experience will have put Britain off referendums, and could prevent a vote on leaving the EU -- but concludes Cameron will probably press ahead.

Sueddeutsche Zeitung runs a comment piece saying "The United Kingdom remains united. This is a good decision. It saves Scots, Brits, Europeans and even the world a lot of trouble. After all, who wants to solve problems with new boundaries, and play with emotions."

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung runs a headline of "No! [in English] Scots vote against independence" and a comment piece entitled "Now the federalism debate begins".

"You can hear the sigh of relief from Madrid to Brussels and Berlin," the paper says. "And also in Washington, because the United States had asked anxiously whether the most faithful of allies would be lost. In the end, the future of Scotland, the United Kingdom and, who knows, other European countries didn't hang by a few votes."

The paper goes on to suggest that the vote has opened the way for a fully federal UK: "One can perhaps say Scotland gets the best of all worlds. In other words, the UK is at the beginning of a great debate on federalism."

The paper says the result is good news for the rest of Europe. "It's good for European politics if the pro-European Scots and the eurosceptic Englishman stay together: it has become less likely that Britain will leave the European Union."

Welt, which was the only major German paper to flirt with a pro-independence stance, again breaks ranks with a piece headlined "The UK now has an English problem".

"The Englishman will not accept without complaint ever more self-determination for the Scots while a parallel increase in rights for the English regions is absent," the paper says.

Sweden

Sweden's foreign minister Carl Bildt has welcomed Scottish voters' decision to stay part of the UK.

"The United Kingdom stays united. So must Europe," he tweeted.

The United Kingdom stays united. So must Europe. — Carl Bildt (@carlbildt) September 19, 2014

China : Online commentators look on in envy

China’s initial reaction to the Scottish vote was a pragmatic one, writes Malcolm Moore in Beijing.

“The vote against independence is good for Chinese living in the UK,” said the China Daily on its Chinese language website.

“It is good news for Chinese students studying in the UK, especially in Scotland because it will not affect their diplomas. It is also good for Chinese with UK citizenship because they can still work freely in Scotland,” the newspaper reported.

Over the past few weeks, China has had to balance its distaste for independence movements with its pleasure at the possibility of a diminished Britain.

The Global Times, a state-run nationalist newspaper, said the Scottish vote was part of the “fiercest outbreak of secessionism” that the West had seen for years. “There is also secessionism in the East, notably in China, India and Russia,” it conceded. “But legal, political and moral systems play an effective role,” it added.

“Western society now apparently lacks confidence in an unprecedented way. Terms like solidarity, cooperation and diligence have long disappeared from the dictionary of many Westerners, who instead pursue maximum profit by financial or political means.”

On the internet, Chinese commentators tweeted that “no one” had lost the referendum. “The UK shows the world its political civilisation and shows other regimes, which only show their muscle and use force, how there are alternatives to handling disputes.”

“Britain is the biggest winner,” tweeted another. “It shows its confidence and civilisation to the world and its full respect to human rights and public opinion. It brings shame to those rascal countries which frequently roll their tanks into the street.”

Some lamented their lack of similar democratic rights. “They can say yes, they can say no, we can say ‘Oh’,” wrote one.

But others held out hope that the UK would eventually suffer a separation. “As long as the UK continues to try to split up China, China will keep supporting Scottish independence. Next time try harder Scotland!” wrote one.