It is unlikely that an independent Scotland would be cut off from the rights and obligations of EU membership for any period of time, according to research from the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC).

It found that although it is likely that it would have to apply through the accession process for new members, EU membership for independent Scotland is not in any serious doubt.

The research is part of the ESRC funded project, The Future of the UK and Scotland.

The paper explores the legal issues surrounding membership of the European Union for an independent Scotland.

It found that "there are strong reasons to believe that in the event of a Yes vote in the September referendum the European Union would be prepared to open negotiations aimed at securing the membership of an independent Scotland".

Researchers note it is highly likely that the United Kingdom will continue in membership of the EU should Scotland become independent, while it is likely that Scotland will require to apply for accession through Article 49 of the European treaties — the process of joining for new member states.

Article 48, which the Scottish Government says would allow Scotland to negotiate its membership from within, also offers a "plausible route to membership depending upon the political will" of the EU, the paper found.

Researchers said the timetable proposed by the Scottish Government which sets out plans for full accession by March 2016 is "ambitious", but "it is unlikely, however, that an independent Scotland would find itself cut off from the rights and obligations that come with European Union membership for any period of time".

"In the event that formal accession has not been secured by independence day it is likely that temporary provisions will be put in place to ensure that the rights and obligations arising from the EU treaties will continue to apply to Scotland in the interim period," they said.

A Yes Scotland spokesman said: "An independent Scotland will be a full and valued member of the EU — as it has been for the past 40 years.

"The real threat to Scotland's European future comes from the Prime Minister's proposed in/out referendum."

A spokesman for Better Together said: "Reapplying to join the EU would be a long and complicated process and this report reaffirms that the timescale the nationalists have set out isn't realistic.

"The issue of a separate Scotland's EU membership exposed the fact that Alex Salmond will say anything to get us to vote for separation, when it was revealed the legal advice he said he had never existed.

"Leaving the UK means we would have to reapply to join the EU. This would put at risk all of the special EU deals Scottish families benefit from today as part of the UK. These include the zero VAT rate on kids' clothes, our rebate worth £135 a year for every household and our opt-outs on the Euro and the no borders immigration scheme.

"Alex Salmond is asking Scottish families to risk benefits worth hundreds of pounds a year on his bluff and bluster alone. That is why we should say No Thanks to separation."

Related articles