Six arrests as young men shout loyalist slogans and racist abuse and appear to make Nazi salutes, as well as chanting Rule Britannia

Six people were arrested amid angry scenes in Glasgow on Friday night as a group of young pro-union supporters clashed with pro-independence supporters who had been gathering in George Square throughout the day.

Police acted to separate a small group of pro-independence supporters from a group of skinheads believed to have marched from the loyalist pub the Louden Tavern in nearby Duke Street.

Individuals argued over the referendum result and a chorus of Rule Britannia was countered by Flower of Scotland.

As the evening wore on, and the yes supporters dispersed, more loyalists converged on the square, many of them draped in union flags.

A number were teenagers, and clearly drunk. At one point a section of the crowd broke through police lines and marched up the central shopping area of Buchanan Street, chanting the words to Rule Britannia. Some shouted loyalist slogans and racist abuse, and appeared to make Nazi salutes.

The subway station at the top of Buchanan Street was temporarily closed, as police herded the marchers back towards the square. As mounted police attempted to contain the crowd, flares were thrown.

Sam Tonks, an engineer from Uddingston, said he had driven into the city with his wife and daughter because he wanted to celebrate the referendum victory with other no supporters, but had been greeted by something much uglier.

"It's on both sides," he said. "The city is divided by religion already and to be honest I think the union jacks and saltires are a bit of an excuse."

Six people were arrested, police said. Social media reports indicated that trouble continued into the early hours of the morning, but a Police Scotland spokesman said groups had dwindled to sets of two and three people by about 1am.

He said: "Six people have been arrested so far in relation to the incident in George Square. Retrospective inquiries will be carried out which may lead to further arrests."