BAE Systems is continuing to progress the selection of key equipment suppliers for the UK Royal Navy's (RN's) next-generation Type 26 Global Combat Ship (GCS) ahead of a government main gate investment decision expected later this year.

At the same time the company is recommending a plan for a new complex warship production facility at its existing Scotstoun yard in Glasgow for Type 26 construction and integration. Site redevelopment is set to begin early next year, subject to overall programme approval.

Intended to replace the RN's current Type 23 frigates from the early 2020s, the Type 26 has been conceived as an acoustically quiet surface combatant that will form the backbone of the RN out to 2060. Current plans call for a class of 13 ships to replace the current Type 23s on a one-for-one basis.

BAE Systems Maritime-Naval Ships began a four-year Type 26 Assessment Phase under a GBP127 million (USD213 million) contract awarded by the Ministry of Defence (MoD) in March 2010. A joint team from industry is working with the MoD to mature the ship detailed design and support strategy ahead of the submission of a costed proposal early in the third quarter of 2014.

Having announced a first tranche of key suppliers in September last year (comprising Rolls-Royce, MTU, David Brown Gear Systems, and Rohde & Schwarz), BAE Systems said on 3 June it had awarded design development agreement contracts with a further six companies: Babcock (air weapons handling system); DCNS (propulsion shaftlines); GE Energy Power Conversion (electric propulsion motors and drive system); Imtech (heating, ventilation and air conditioning system, and low voltage electrical equipment); Raytheon (integrated navigation and bridge system); and Tyco Fire & Integrated Solutions (fixed firefighting systems).

Several other major ship system downselections remain the subject of competition, including the integrated platform management system, the mission bay handling system, stabilisers, and steering gear. BAE Systems said it expects to have about 25 design development agreements in place by the end of this year.

Earlier this year BAE Systems revealed that it was looking at two possible Type 26 build strategies, both centred on the Clyde. The first option - and the company's favoured choice - is a GBP200 million redevelopment of the existing Scotstoun site to establish an all-new complex warship building facility to allow Type 26 manufacture, integration, and commissioning activities to be consolidated on a single site. The second option is a more modest upgrade of existing facilities at the Govan and Scotstoun sites, with Type 26 activity to be split between the two.

Although both options are still running, Geoff Searle, BAE Systems' Type 26 Global Combat Ship programme director, said the company was now very much driving the single-site option on the basis that it offers the best solution both for cost efficiency and performance.

"This will create a 21st-century complex warship facility for Type 26 and beyond, and allow us to build Type 26 in the most efficient manner possible," he said. "All of our planning is based on the assumption that we will build at the revamped Scotstoun facility. We are looking to start work on the redevelopment in early 2015 to allow Type 26 manufacture to start in May 2016."

However, the go-ahead for build on the Clyde depends on the result of September's referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom. Searle insisted that BAE Systems had "no 'Plan B'" for the build of Type 26 elsewhere in the United Kingdom should Scotland vote to secede.

Although BAE Systems is developing its Type 26 proposal on the basis of a 13-ship programme, Searle said it "expects a phased commitment" to actual ship offtake.

Minister for Defence Equipment, Support, and Technology Philip Dunne said last December that the initial order, subject to main gate approval, was expected to be for eight vessels. Searle declined to say how many ships he expects to be in the first batch, saying only that "there are a number of options being looked at including the best way of phasing the programme".

(671 words)