Interviewed on the BBC on Sunday, Alex Salmond’s mask of phoney sweet reasonableness momentarily slipped . In lively exchanges with the Conservative MP Anna Soubry, the former SNP leader remarked that the surge in support for the Nationalists in Scotland showed they had not really lost last September’s referendum after all.

Funnily enough, most of us remember the result as being a pretty emphatic rejection of independence by 55 per cent to 45 per cent, in what was supposedly a once-in-a-lifetime poll on the future of the Union. But to Mr Salmond, who resigned as party leader not long afterwards, it simply marked another staging post on the road to separation. His principal device now for bringing this about is to foment as much constitutional chaos as possible by using a good SNP showing in May to prop up a Labour government under Ed Miliband.

If the polls are right, the SNP could win more than 30 or even 40 seats on May 7, obliterating Labour, which relies on its showing north of the border for any chance of a majority at Westminster. This is the reason why Mr Miliband has ruled out a formal coalition with the SNP, which was not on offer in any case, but has deliberately kept open the option of a deal that puts him into Downing Street on a vote by vote basis.

Alex Salmond admitted the SNP could still support a minority Labour government on a vote-by-vote basis

He is being lured down this path by Mr Salmond and Nicola Sturgeon, who are fully aware of the resentment such a pact would cause in England and who have even dropped their “red line” demand of scrapping Trident in order to facilitate a deal with Labour. In his interview, Mr Salmond said if the SNP held the balance, it would hold the power. The SNP, he added, would veto any Labour Budget that did not include billions of pounds of extra spending.

Mr Salmond sees himself as a modern version of Charles Stewart Parnell, the Irish nationalist leader who caused parliamentary mayhem in an attempt to break the Union at the end of the 19th century, bringing down two governments in the process. He is relying on the 45 per cent who voted Yes last September to stick with the SNP, while the majority who voted No to split three ways among the Union parties.

The best way of stopping him, therefore, is to use tactical voting to defeat the SNP candidates wherever they stand. Understandably, the leaders of the three other parties are reluctant to recommend such a move to their supporters and Labour is especially tribal in Scotland, where its complacency has played into the SNP’s hands. In normal times, expecting a Conservative to vote Labour or vice versa would be unreasonable; but these aren’t normal times. To avert a crisis that will once again threaten the Union, a new and bold approach is needed to stop Mr Salmond in his tracks.

• Register to vote in the 2015 General Election: The deadline is April 20