Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond defended his dream of an independent state yesterday as he hit back at Chancellor George Osborne’s warning that the country will not be part of a currency union if its voters quit the UK.

The SNP leader warned that businesses across the remainder of the UK would face transaction costs of “hundreds of millions of pounds” if Scotland is forced to use a different currency. The Scottish Government estimates these costs – dubbed by Mr Salmond the “George tax” – could run to £500m.

His fightback speech also followed a prediction by European Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso that it would be “extremely difficult, if not impossible” for an independent Scotland to win approval from member states for it to join the EU.

But Mr Salmond said EU law “would require all parties to negotiate in good faith and a spirit of co-operation”. He argued blocking Scotland would “pose a challenge to the integrity of the European Union even greater and more fundamental than the threat of British withdrawal.”

Mr Salmond suggested pre-referendum talks on currency and Europe could start, describing these as “not negotiations which prejudge the outcome but sensible technical conversations”.

Shortly after the speech, the Chancellor said: “It’s now even clearer that Alex Salmond is a man without a plan. Detailed analysis and independent advice shows clearly that what is best for Scotland is keeping the stable and durable currency union we have now. The only way to do that is to keep the UK together.

“If Scotland walks away from the UK it walks away from the pound.”

However, Plaid Cymru Treasury spokesman Jonathan Edwards said: “The Scottish First Minister has set out the clear case for a currency union. He also demolished the premise of George Osborne’s bullying threats to Scotland which have been disgracefully backed by all three Westminster unionist parties...

“It is incomprehensible why Osborne would want to add to [the remaining UK’s] business costs by refusing a shared currency with an independent Scotland. Most worrying is the UK Government’s threat to Welsh business by saying it will refuse a shared currency.

“Businesses here will have to pay transaction costs on trade with Scottish businesses, potentially making them less competitive and putting jobs at risk.”

Welsh Conservative MEP Kay Swinburne predicted Scotland would encounter intense opposition from Spain in any bid to join the EU, arguing its Government will fight to stop Scotland setting a precedent for breakaway regions.

Ms Swinburne said the present Spanish foreign minister, when still an MEP, had greeted her with a warning against Welsh independence.

She said: “His first comment to me was, ‘Don’t you think you you’re going to have any independence because we would veto any application.” She continued: “It’s fundamental for the Spanish... It sets a precedent, which is what worries the large member states in particular but the smaller ones have also got big issues, particularly in central and eastern Europe. So, no, it’s not going to be that easy and I think Barroso was quite brave.”