Scottish independence would cost businesses north of the Border 11 times as much as their competitors in England if both countries do not share a currency, according to an analysis published by Labour.

Johann Lamont, the party's Scottish leader, unveiled figures compiled by Holyrood officials showing having different currencies on either side of the Border would burden Scottish businesses with £400 million of transaction costs annually.

This is the equivalent of £1,229 per company, she told MSPs, compared a charge of only £109 per business in the remainder of the United Kingdom.

This is because Scottish companies are much more reliant on trade with England than the other way round.

Ms Lamont published the costs a week after the Chancellor, Shadow Chancellor and the Chief Secretary to the Treasury ruled out Alex Salmond’s plan for a currency union with an independent Scotland.

The First Minister yesterday said any such transaction costs would be their responsibility for refusing to agree to his proposal.

Earlier this week he called the extra burden on English, Welsh and Northern Irish businesses the ‘George Tax’ after the Chancellor.

However, the Institute of Directors has stated that any new transaction costs would “pale in comparison to the financial danger of entering an unstable currency union.”

Mr Salmond continued to resist calls from the opposition parties for him to spell out his Plan B currency, repeating his claim that George Osborne was bluffing.

But a new opinion poll showed that two-thirds of Scots want him to set out an alternative to his sterling zone proposal in case the Chancellor does not change his mind.

Unveiling the Scottish Parliament figures at First Minister’s Questions, Ms Lamont also broke them down by head of population. She said: “Transaction costs for the rest of the UK, the so-called George Tax, work out at £9 per head for people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

“But if the Scottish Government's own figures are to be believed, the cost in Scotland would be £75 a head – eight times greater.”

She concluded: "Given this would be the consequence of his plan to break up the United Kingdom, why should Scottish business pay the Alex Tax?"

But Mr Salmond said: “Our proposal is to share the pound and not have the transaction costs.

“It is her proposal – that is Ed Balls's and George Osborne's proposal – to force Scotland into a different currency and impose transaction costs on Scottish and English business.”

Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, pointed out that neither the CBI or the Institute of Directors endorse Mr Salmond’s plans.

In addition to the opposition of political leaders in the remainder of the UK, she cited a recent opinion poll showing a majority of the English, Welsh and Northern Irish public do not want a currency union.

“The First Minister may still be in denial but the rest of the country has woken up to the truth. Isn't this the week that we found out the emperor has no clothes?” she said.

Willie Rennie, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, said Mr Salmond was the “last man standing” defending a currency union, arguing that he cannot maintain that stance until September’s referendum.

An opinion poll published by a newspaper yesterday showed 65 per cent of Scots think Mr Salmond should name his Plan B currency compared to 20 per cent who disagreed and 15 per cent who did not know.

However, the opinion poll lead for the pro-UK campaign has shrunk to nine points in the wake of the Chancellor’s intervention, with 46.6 per cent of voters rejecting separation and 37.7 per cent in favour.

A breakdown of the results showed a very small lead for the Yes campaign among men but it still lagging 19 percentage points behind among women.