A new grassroots campaign for the Union will identify constituencies around Scotland in which tactical voting could be used in the general election to defeat the SNP.

With polls predicting major gains for the nationalists, the Scotland in Union group says it has anecdotal evidence of voters all over the country considering a tactical vote to halt a nationalist bandwagon in May.

It says it will not tell people how to vote, but will provide information on seats where, for example, Conservative supporters backing Labour, or vice versa, could secure a victory for a pro-Union candidate.

Set up by former No campaign activists, it plans to carry out analysis of key constituencies to provide the “tools to help people make their own decision”.

It has already received donations that it plans to use for research and polls in constituencies, and has a particular interest in Gordon, where Alex Salmond is the favourite to defeat Christine Jardine, the Lib Dem candidate who hopes to defend the seat formerly held by Sir Malcolm Bruce.

Labour and Conservative leaders have repeatedly warned their supporters not to vote tactically.

David Cameron, the Prime Minister, and Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, told their party conference in Edinburgh last month that if Scots did not want Ed Miliband in Downing Street - with the help of the SNP - they must vote Conservative.

Scottish Labour has also warned that any voter who wants to “stop the Tories” being the biggest party should vote for it.

However, there have been reports from Conservative canvassers and activists that some of their traditional supporters are prepared to do the unthinkable and vote Labour in areas where the Tories are seen to have no chance of winning.

Alastair Cameron, a member of Scotland in Union, and a former captain in the Highlanders, the Scottish infantry regiment, said: “We are not a tactical voting organisation, we are aiming to be a long term positive presence for the union in Scotland.

“But with the general election looming and everyone talking about tactical voting we feel it is part of our remit to discuss it.”

He added the organisation was born out of frustration with the SNP’s refusal to accept the result of the independence referendum.

The organisation will be launched later this week, and by the end of the week plans to publish a paper on its view on tactical voting.

Mr Cameron, a management consultant in Edinburgh, added: “We are very aware that tactical voting is not for everybody, we are totally understanding of the main parties rejecting it, because of course they would.

“Anecdotally, a lot of people we speak to who are supportive of the union are talking about it and considering it, and in some cases intending it without considering it fully.”

He described Gordon as an interesting case study, adding: “You have the famous strong brand of Alex Salmond, who is nonetheless a very divisive figure, against the prime contender, being the local campaigner for the incumbent party that has done an awful lot for the area over the period.

“A lot of people are looking at Gordon as, not a bell weather, but as a totemic struggle.”

Meanwhile, Nicola Sturgeon claimed that private polling showed Labour was facing a “meltdown” in May because voters no longer trusted its leadership.

Last week, a TNS poll put the SNP on 46 per cent, up five points in a month, and Labour down one point to 30 per cent.

Writing in The Sunday Times, the First Minister said: “If the Westminster establishment has been spooked by the public polls, they have reason to be, because our private work is telling us exactly the same story.

“Published polls show that most people in Scotland are not in favour of the idea of a Labour government left to its own devices and would much rather see a strong SNP influence on Labour.”

Ms Sturgeon has already set out her terms - the scrapping of Trident and a spending spree of pounds180 billion to boost the economy - for a deal with Mr Miliband in the event of a hung parliament.

Felicity Kane, of Scotland in Union, who works in marketing, said the SNP was a united party against divided parties, and the new group hoped to create one voice.

She told Scotland on Sunday: “The SNP has done very well and is one united party against divided parties and our aim is to get that one voice. We want to capture the excitement and positivity that the unionist parties lack.”