Scotland will not get another chance to become independent if it chooses to remain as part of the United Kingdom, David Cameron has suggested.

In an interview with BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Cameron said that the referendum will be "decisive, legal, fair, irreversible and binding".

His comments come amid concerns from those campaigning against independence that in the event of a narrow vote against independence the SNP could campaign for a second referendum.

Mr Cameron said: "I think giving them a referendum that is decisive, legal, fair, irreversible and binding – that is the right thing to do.

"Now, obviously it’s a vital debate. I was quite struck when in Scotland last week that every single school that has had a debate on the referendum has voted to stay in the United Kingdom.

"My reflection, listening to the debate, is that as soon as you get onto the issues about jobs, about prosperity, about security, people can see the advantages of remaining inside the United Kingdom and let the debate continue.”

He said that it was right for Scotland to be able to "choose its future", and that denying the public a referendum would have been "disastrous".

He said: "I think trust the people is a very good guide and I think that the Scottish people should be able to decide whether they want to stay in the United Kingdom or whether they want to separate themselves from it.

“I think this is a deeply Conservative view of life, that in the end you should trust people rather than bureaucracies and institutions to chart the right course."

He refused to speculate on what he would say to the Queen if Scotland voted for independence, describing the conversations as "deeply private" and "probably the only private meeting you have all week."

He reiterated that he would not resign as Prime Minister if the unionists lost the referendum.

“Absolutely not and I think it’s important know that, because the vote is simply about one thing: does Scotland stay in the United Kingdom, or does it separate itself from the United Kingdom? It’s not about anything else.”

He made the comments as Alex Salmond, Scotland's First Minister, said that Mr Cameron had "lost control" of the European debate.

Unionists have suggested that an independent Scotland would have to reapply for membership of the European Union.

Mr Salmond said: "Although I suspect the PM doesn’t want to withdraw from the EU but he is not really in control of the debate.

"So the balance of opinion in Scotland is we should look to further Scotland’s interest within the European context, so it’s not really a worry.

“The balance of opinion in Scotland is that we should be an independent member of the European Union and we don’t have the same agonised debate as is taking place in England where a substantial section of the population are questioning the idea of European membership in total."

He also criticised the government's immigration system, which he said is unnecessarily restrictive. He said: “We think it's madness that at the present moment we take a number of international students into Scotland, we spend years raising their human capital and the policy of the current UK Government is to refuse them the ability to do so; to stop them doing that. We think that’s a foolish policy."