Alex Salmond's plan to scrap Trident after Scottish independence would put the UK's nuclear deterrent "in jeopardy", more than a dozen of Britain's most senior defence veterans have warned.

Removing Trident nuclear weapons from Scotland after a Yes vote would endanger thousands of jobs and cast a "dark shadow" over relations with allies, the former army and defence chiefs warned.

They said the SNP's proposed timescale for scrapping Trident would create "huge practical problems" and "inevitably sour" post-independence negotiations, adding that such an anti-nuclear stance would be "unacceptable" to Nato allies.

The stark analysis came in a letter to the First Minister written by admiral Sir Mark Stanhope, former first sea lord and chief of naval staff, and co-signed by former heads of the army, navy, air force and intelligence.

Key SNP "White Paper" defence pledges - outlined in the party's 670-page blueprint for independence - are challenged in the letter, including the claim that a separate Scotland could join Nato despite its explicit anti-nuclear stance.

"Nato, as an Alliance with nuclear deterrence as a central part of its strategic concept, could hardly be expected to welcome a new member state whose government put in jeopardy the continued operation of the UK independent nuclear deterrent – a deterrent which protects not only the UK but all of Nato as well," the letter read.

"The United States and France as two of the P3 nuclear powers could be expected to be particularly concerned at the risk that an independent Scotland was effectively pushing a unilateral nuclear disarmament agenda that they and Nato have consistently opposed.

"They would also view with alarm the White Paper suggestion of a constitutional ban on nuclear weapons in Scotland – a move which would be unacceptable for Nato allies."

The Scottish Government's White Paper describes Trident as "an affront to basic decency with its indiscriminate and inhumane destructive power" which would be removed from its Faslane base within the first parliament after independence.

Mr Salmond repeated the SNP's nuclear stance at the party's conference last weekend, giving delegates a "cast iron guarantee" that a Yes vote in the independence referendum would see the removal of "weapons of mass destruction" from Scotland "once and for all".

Yet Westminster has suggested that an independent Scotland could be forced to change its position on Trident if it became independent, with Philip Hammond, the defence secretary, saying that "everything will be on the table" during negotiations - an idea echoed in the criticsm from former defence chiefs revealed in the letter.

"For the continuing UK such a demand, not least in the timescale envisaged, would cause huge practical problems and upheaval for the Royal Navy and require massive additional expenditure – running into many billions of pounds – and would be deeply resented by many," the letter read.

"The negotiations with Westminster following a ‘Yes” vote, covering such vital matters as currency, financial settlements and re-allocating existing UK defence and other assets, can be expected to be complex and difficult. If the very future of the UK nuclear deterrent was also in the balance, it would inevitably sour those negotiations."

"Many if not most" of the 7,000 people who worked at the naval base at Faslane and Coulport would "lose their jobs", according to the letter.

The letter is co-signed by former chiefs of the defence staff Air Chief Marshal Lord Stirrup, General Lord Walker, Admiral the Lord Boyce and Field Marshal Lord Guthrie; first sea lords and chiefs of the naval staff Admiral Sir Jonathon Band, Admiral Lord West of Spithead, Admiral Sir Nigel Essenhigh, Admiral Sir Jock Slater; former chief of the general staff General Sir Mike Jackson; former chief of the air staff Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Squire; and former permanent secretary and security and intelligence coordinator at the Cabinet office Sir David Omand.