FOR generations of Scottish children, a school trip to study the Battle of Bannockburn—a medieval clash which saw Robert the Bruce and his hardy spearmen rout a much larger force of English knights—has served as a milestone in their patriotic education. They learn how the underdog Scots caught the English in a trap, corralling their mighty horsemen “like sheep in a pen” and leaving them no room to attack. This victory, school groups hear, has “inspired the Scots ever since”.

In June 2014 the 700th anniversary of the battle will be marked by re-enactments and the opening of a new museum. A few weeks later, Scotland will host the Commonwealth games and the 2014 Ryder Cup golf tournament. And Scotland wants to hold another stirring event in the autumn of 2014: a referendum on whether to quit the United Kingdom.

The announcement came from Alex Salmond, first minister of Scotland's devolved government and boss of the pro-independence Scottish National Party (SNP). Interviewed a day later at his official residence—a Georgian mansion in Edinburgh's New Town—Mr Salmond admits that, with all its cheering events, 2014 will be a “good year to hold a referendum”.

Like his hero Robert the Bruce, Mr Salmond starts this fight as an underdog. Although the SNP has controlled the Scottish Parliament since 2011, only about a third of Scots favour breaking with the union (see chart), though most would like to see more powers shift from London to Edinburgh.

The Labour, Liberal Democrat and Conservative parties are committed to keeping the United Kingdom together. Britain's prime minister, David Cameron, vows to defend the union with “every fibre”, though his party has just one MP north of the border, and a growing number of his English MPs grumble about Britain “subsidising” Scotland's comparatively generous public services (a charge the SNP disputes, arguing that Scotland bankrolls Britain with North Sea oil and gas revenues). Labour and the Liberal Democrats, with scores of MPs in Scotland, have additional reasons to cheer the union. Without Scottish seats, Labour would struggle to win a House of Commons majority again.

The SNP took office promising to hold a referendum on independence, but not in the first three years of their term, prompting charges that the party feared asking Scottish voters sooner. The announcement of a 2014 date was bounced out of Mr Salmond after Mr Cameron said that a vote held without the authority of the British Parliament could be unlawful. Backed by his Liberal Democrat coalition partners, the prime minister made the SNP a high-stakes offer: legal powers to hold a referendum, but on Westminster's terms.

Mr Cameron's government is seeking several concessions in return for its help. It wants a straight yes-or-no referendum on independence, distrusting hints from Mr Salmond that he might put more than one question to Scottish voters, offering them not just independence but also a form of deep devolution that would leave little more than defence and foreign policy in British government hands. The pro-union parties dislike the vagueness of “devo max” and want to force Mr Salmond into a straight defeat on independence.

The British government wants independent oversight of the poll and dislikes Mr Salmond's idea of votes for 16- and 17-year-old Scots (seen as gung-ho about a split). For a heady day or so, aides to Mr Cameron talked about forcing the Scottish government to hold a referendum within 18 months, before Mr Salmond retaliated with his own date, accusing Mr Cameron of “almost Thatcheresque” conduct (a grave charge north of the border). Westminster teasing about a “neverendum” aside, Mr Salmond will probably pick the date. Everything else is up for grabs.

Mr Salmond is on soothing form. He denies “any thought” of hijacking the Bannockburn anniversary. He insists, with a straight face, that his referendum is being delayed almost three years merely to ensure it is well-organised. The SNP, he says, is considering a multi-option referendum because it cannot ignore a big section of public opinion, not because it wants a fallback if Scots reject independence.

Mr Salmond confirms that Britain's submarine-based nuclear deterrent would have to leave its current home in the deep waters of a Scottish loch. Scotland would leave NATO but would retain an army of perhaps 8,000-12,000 men, a navy and an air force. Scottish warplanes could have served in Libya. But Scotland would have shunned the “illegal” invasion of Iraq.

An independent Scotland would be a co-operative neighbour, Mr Salmond repeatedly says. Queen Elizabeth II would remain Scotland's monarch. He would accept a stability pact as a basis for sharing the pound with the British. Asked if he would accept binding debt and deficit rules, he ducks the question. With its oil wealth, Scotland will be a better credit risk than England, he beams.

Once voters choose independence, the Scottish government will be an easy negotiator with “few red lines”, predicts the first minister. The friendship between the Scots and English will be “re-invigorated”. But until then, no meddling in Scotland's vote. The warning is clear. Mr Salmond faces a tough battle. He intends to pick the ground on which he fights it.