The official pro-UK campaign has publicly called for Scots to stop giving it money after a flurry of donations following Alex Salmond's TV debate defeat.

A message posted yesterday on Better Together's website announced it had "secured enough funding" to meet campaign spending limits and thanked the "generosity" of its backers.

The group is also understood to be removing an online form that allows anybody to give money to the campaign to save the Union.

The announcement marks a significant turnaround after leading pro-UK figures privately expressed concerns they were losing the funding battle against the Yes campaign earlier this year.

Thousands of small donations are understood to have flooded in to Better Together after Alistair Darling debated independence with Mr Salmond on television last week.

A snap poll of viewers handed Mr Darling victory after he repeatedly grilled the First Minister over what an independent Scotland's "Plan B" currency would be given sharing the pound has been ruled out.

Wealthy Scottish landowners and investment bankers have donated hundreds of thousands of pounds to the pro-UK campaign, while the Yes campaign has been heavily funded by the Weirs, Scotland's EuroMillions lottery winners.

Official campaign groups are limited to spending £1.5 million during the official campaign period. Political parties, however, have separate spending allowances. Figures in the UK-based parties last night stressed they continue to seek donations to help fight independence.

Blair McDougall, Better Together campaign director, said: "We have had so many small donations following last week’s TV debate that we are now asking people to stop donating to us. It’s really encouraging that so many people want to support our campaign."

The message posted on Better Together's donations page read: "Due to the generosity of our supporters across Scotland we have now secured enough funding to meet our permitted spending limit in the campaign regulated period and are no longer seeking donations to Better Together."

The news emerged a new poll showed the No campaign's lead increasing with just weeks remaining before the independence vote.

Researchers found 45 per cent of Scottish voters plan to vote No - up four points on a similar poll the month before - while just 32 per cent will vote Yes. The remaining people were undecided.

The TNS poll of the more than 1,000 Scots was taken largely during the Commonwealth Games, suggesting the event has failed to boost support for independence.

A separate survey of Scottish doctors revealed that six in 10 plan to reject independence, with many citing fears over the impact of a Yes vote on medical research.

More than 300 doctors told the British Medical Journal (BMJ) their views on independence, with the vast majority of those against separation saying concerns that the economy will suffer outside the UK was a factor.

One No voter told the BMJ an independent Scotland "cannot afford the current level of healthcare provision" while another felt that a Yes vote "would be very harmful for our long-term health needs here in Scotland."

One third of doctors asked said they would vote Yes. One pro-independence doctor said a Yes vote "could make it easier for Scotland to tailor health and social care to what is needed, wanted, and works locally".

Jackson Carlaw, Scottish Conservative health spokesman, said: "Doctors, just like everyone else, will have seen the crude attempts by the SNP to politicise the NHS in recent weeks. The outrageous and frankly inaccurate scaremongering is convincing no-one."

A Yes Scotland spokesman said: "As the Financial Times reported recently, the No campaign is funded by 'billionaire bankers, property companies and Conservative Party supporters' - the very people who are least likely to support a fairer, more equal society in Scotland, and many of whom do not have a vote in the referendum.

Alex Neil, Scotland's health minister, said: "Devolution only protects Scotland from the policy decisions of Westminster, it cannot protect us from their cuts to Scotland’s public purse through austerity and the erosion of public spending through privatisation.

"As Scotland’s Future makes clear, with independence we have the opportunity to protect the gains of devolution and protect public spending on the NHS and other key public services."