The proposed date of Scottish independence could be delayed in the event of a Yes vote if it is not in the best interests of the rest of the UK, according to a House of Lords report.

Baroness Jay of Paddington, the Labour peer who chairs the constitution committee, said the Prime Minister "should feel under no obligation to conclude negotiations by March 2016".

She also claimed that the Scottish Government's proposed timetable for separation had no legal or constitutional standing

Peers also suggested Scottish MPs should be allowed to keep their seats beyond a Yes vote in the independence referendum.

They said the 59 MPs north of the border should leave Westminster only at the formal point of independence, and recommended that they should not be allowed to negotiate for the rest of the UK on the terms of independence.

This would prevent MPs who represent Scottish seats negotiating for the rest of the UK, scrutinising the UK's negotiating team or ratifying a resulting agreement, the committee argued.

Those affected would include Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, as well as Alistair Carmichael, the Scottish Secretary, Alistair Darling, leader of the Better Together campaign, and Gordon Brown, the former Prime Minister.

The committee also recommends Scotland should be seen as a successor state, meaning the UK would keep its existing international agreements while Scotland has to renegotiate.

The Scottish Government has proposed March 2016 as a realistic date for Scotland's independence day, which would allow about 18 months for negotiations to be concluded in the event of a Yes vote.

But Baroness Jay said: "The Prime Minister should feel under no obligation to conclude negotiations by March 2016. The Scottish Government's proposed timetable has no legal or constitutional standing."

The committee also said that in the event of a vote to separate, the negotiating team for the rest of the UK should be a small team from the UK government, rather than cross-party. It should consult the official opposition and the Welsh and Northern Irish Executives.

Angus MacNeil, the SNP MP, said the House of Lords was an "undemocratic anachronism stuffed to the gunnels with over 800 peers of the realm who answer to no electors and are often there because of privilege or patronage".

He added: "To be lectured by them about timetables and democratic processes is something that could only happen in Westminster.

"It will be elected representatives who will lead Scotland's transition to independence, not some elite club whose members can still turn up for just half an hour's work and get a £300 daily allowance."

The Scottish Government is in the process of setting up what First Minister Alex Salmond has described as a non-partisan Team Scotland to negotiate on behalf of Scotland if there is a Yes vote.