José Manuel Barroso, the president of the European commission, has thrown fresh doubt on claims by Alex Salmond that an independent Scotland would automatically remain within the EU.

Barroso said new states that hoped to join the EU would have to apply for membership in their own right, appearing to quash Salmond's assertions that an independent Scotland would inherit its share of the UK's membership.

Meanwhile a spokesman in Brussels appeared to retract a similar statement implying that Catalonia would have to reapply if it seceded from Spain.

In an interview with the BBC, Barroso said he would not discuss Scotland's future within the UK.

"I am not going to speculate now about possible secessions, it is not my job. But I can tell you that to join the European Union, yes, we have a procedure. It is a procedure of international law," he said.

"A state has to be a democracy first of all, and that state has to apply to become a member of the European Union and all the other member states have to give their consent."

Pressed on whether all new countries were regarded as new states by the EU, Barroso said: "A new state, if it wants to join the European Union, has to apply to become a member like any state. In fact, I see no country leaving and I see many countries wanting to join."

His remarks put Salmond under pressure to defend his government's position, which is intended to reassure Scottish voters in the runup to the independence referendum in 2014 that there are few risks posed by breaking away from the UK.

His intervention produced a clear shift in stance from the first minister.

Earlier on Wednesday Keith Brown, Scottish government minister, said an independent Scotland would "take on the same obligations and treaties that we currently have". However, Salmond confirmed last that fresh negotiations with the EU would be needed after independence.

"Yes, there will have to be negotiations, the negotiations will take place from within the context of the European union. The negotiations are about the representation Scotland will have and the rest of it."

There is little doubt an independent Scotland would join the EU, but this intervention suggests there may be a delay.

The pro-UK parties and the Better Together campaign said Barroso's remarks were a blow to Salmond and the Scottish government as it threw into doubt his assertions that Scotland would not need to join the euro as required for new member states or have to adopt tougher treaty obligations on border controls, crime and security.

Salmond and his ministers had previously repeatedly argued that after independence Scotland would automatically inherit all the UK's ties and treaty optouts as a successor state.

Scottish ministers have also suggested that could mean the rest of the UK would have to renegotiate membership of the EU at the same time.

The Scottish government said it had legal and expert opinions to support that case. Salmond has refused, however, to publish his government's legal advice on EU membership and has gone to court to overturn a ruling by the Scottish information commissioner requiring its publication.

A Better Together spokesman said: "We now have it straight from the horse's mouth. Scotland will have to apply to be a member of the European Union if it breaks away from Britain to form a separate state. The SNP's assertion that we would be granted automatic entry has proven to be, like so many of their arguments, a baseless assertion."

Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Conservative leader, said: "We now have the European commission reaffirming what everyone knows – that a separate Scotland cannot simply waltz into the EU unchallenged. Application to the EU means Scotland would have to take the euro, could have huge implications about corporation tax – leaving the country at a disadvantage to the rest of the UK – and could affect border and passport arrangements."

On Tuesday a European commission spokesman, Olivier Bailly, said that after independence Scotland would have to apply to join the EU afresh. "There are two different steps, there is a secession process under international law and the request for accession to EU member state under the EU treaties," Bailly said. "In the meantime, of course, the new treaty is not part of the EU as he [sic] has to make request for accession."

Aware that his remarks had caused a storm of protest in Catalonia, where 1.5 million people marched in support of independence this week, Bailly appeared to retract the statement on Wednesday, saying he had been speaking about a "hypothetical scenario". It was not the commission's role to speculate about the internal affairs of member states, he said.

Academics believe that in reality, a newly independent country's negotiations with Brussels would be based on the premise that the EU would be very keen to keep an independent Catalonia or Scotland within the union, since the EU is an expansionist organisation that believes in pan-European integration.

A Scottish government spokesman said: "As we have always said, an independent Scotland will remain an integral part of the EU, as it has been for almost four decades, and by definition Scotland already meets all the criteria of EU membership."

Following Barosso's remarks, a Foreign Office spokesman said: "It is clear that the Scottish government cannot take for granted the idea that Scotland would secede from the UK but automatically stay in the EU. [The] most likely scenario would be that Scotland would have to join the EU as a new state, requiring negotiation with other member states."