Andrew Murrison said the Scottish Government must use its White Paper on independence this month to provide a detailed breakdown of the armed forces in a separate Scotland, and how it plans to fund them.

His comments came as Nationalists welcomed a report claiming that defence funding would be “easily achievable” in the event of a Yes vote.

Dr Murrison strongly disagreed, telling MPs it was "risible" for the SNP to suggest it could create an independent force by "salami-slicing" units from the British armed forces that are based in Scotland, or have Scottish links.

"They need to be clear about this and what they are going to do,” he said. “They are talking about having submarines, complex warships, fast jets, and restoring the Scottish regiments. It is impossible to have that with a budget of £2.5 billion."

He told the Scottish Affairs Committee it was for SNP ministers to demonstrate they would be able to deploy forces that could deal with cyber security - when the UK Government was planning to spend £850 million on that issue alone - and could respond to information provided by the maritime patrol aircraft they want.

They would also have to explain how a separate Scotland would provide logistical support to Scottish infantry regiments.

Dr Murrison, a former Surgeon Commander in the Royal Navy, also confirmed that new Type 26 frigates - which have been earmarked for construction on Clydeside - would be likely to be built in Portsmouth if Scotland votes Yes.

He added: "In my view, the SNP is going to struggle big-time to convince the people of Scotland that their defence and security is going to be enhanced by an independent Scotland.”

His views were at odds with a report from the Scottish Global Forum suggesting Scotland would have a similar defence budget to Denmark, which "appears to provide effective national defence".

The SNP’s political opponents pointed out that there were several independence supporters on the forum’s advisory board, while its convenor, Stephen Gethins, was until recently a special adviser to Alex Salmond.

The report’s authors, Dr John MacDonald, a Dundee University politics lecturer, and Lt Col Andrew Parrott, retired commanding officer of the Scottish Transport Regiment, suggested a Scottish military would be more efficient than the UK armed forces.

The paper suggested an independent Scotland would have 15,000 full time members of the armed forces and 10,000 reservists.

It proposed a Scottish air force that would include 26 helicopters, 15 fighter aircraft, 15 jet trainer aircraft, four air transport aircraft and four maritime patrol aircraft.

A separate navy would expect to have two submarines, four frigates, four ocean patrol vessels, four coastal patrol vessels and eight inshore patrol craft.

The Scottish army would include four full-time infantry battalions, two armoured infantry battalions and four reserve battalions, in addition to a special forces squadron and one armoured regiment.

Angus Robertson, the SNP defence spokesman, said it was a thoughtful addition to the debate, adding: "We are a maritime nation without maritime patrol aircraft and not a single major conventional naval vessel based in Scotland.

“Our coastal defences are shamefully inadequate and, as the report says, the key priority is to 'defend the perimeter' which is not even on Westminster's agenda.

"Taxpayers in Scotland contribute billions of pounds to the MoD, which is not spent here, while at the same time we have suffered disproportionate job cuts.”

Willie Rennie, leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, said the report was “hugely embarrassing” for the SNP as it recommended scrapping the idea of building Type 26 frigates under a joint-procurement operation in a separate Scotland, days after Nicola Sturgeon, the Deputy First Minister, insisted that was the most likely outcome of a Yes vote.

The report suggests four 6,500 tonne frigates, based on the current Danish classes, could be built on the Clyde.