The leader of the Yes campaign has said he did not believe the BBC showed bias in its coverage of the independence referendum.

Blair Jenkins, the chief executive of Yes Scotland, said the broadcaster has not shown any systemic bias, but criticised "mistakes" in their reporting.

Many supporters of Yes claimed the corporation had showed favouritism towards the No campaign, and a number of demonstrations were held outside the BBC Scotland building in Glasgow.

The First Minister Alex Salmond clashed with BBC on a number of occasions, and had a particularly fractious encounter with political reporter Nick Robinson.

But in an interview with STV News, Mr Jenkins said: "I think there were mistakes made by the broadcasters, and I think there were omissions and I think sometimes because broadcasters are not always as well resourced as once they were there is a tendency to pick up the newspaper agenda unthinkingly more than was perhaps the case in previous decades.

"We had issues from time to time, but I don't myself that we faced a systemic bias if you like, that there was some corporate intent to disadvantage the Yes campaign.

"Knowing how both STV and the BBC operate, and knowing a lot of the people involved I don't think that's a credible view."

Prominent yes campaigner Dennis Canavan said the referendum was affected by the media. He said: "A whole combination of the forces of the political establishment, and the media of course, most of the media were against us."

After the No vote of September 18, prominent campaigners from the Yes side have analysed the main reasons why Scotland voted No.

Jim Sillars, former SNP deputy leader said concerns over the currency and the SNP's vision of independence were factors in the final result.

"We can't have a strategy next time of change,no change. You know, keep the queen, keep the pound, things like that", he said.

"I think we've got to say plain and straight, we're after a republican Scotland. In currency terms, we'll have our own currency and we'll have no connection with the Bank of England."

Related articles