Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

DR John Robertson is a respected academic with a long track record of exposing bias in newspapers and television.

His work includes forensic examinations of how the media handles everything from people with autism, to the information blitz that is UK Budget day.

Now the Reader in Media Politics and his researchers have turned their expertise to coverage of the independence referendum.

Dr Robertson’s team at the University of the West of Scotland spent a year, to September 2013, studying the early evening news programmes of BBC Scotland and STV.

Stories with an “anti-independence” slant outnumbered those of the pro Yes side three to two.

The BBC’s Reporting Scotland showed 272 news items that benefited the No campaign, but just 171 favourable to Yes.

STV’s early evening programme had 255 stories boosting the No side and 172 for Yes.

Newspapers often favour one political party or point of view, as is their right.

But television is different. The BBC is paid for by viewers and is governed by a Royal Charter that demands the highest standards of impartiality.

STV, though a commercial channel, also has a legal duty to be balanced.

The University of the West of Scotland study found both in breach of these obligations.

Dr Robertson’s academic team also found that 28 BBC news items ended with an unchallenged anti-independence claim, compared to eight for the pro-independence side. The figures for STV were 34 and 17. Too often, the last word went to No.

The researchers also found a lazy tendency to personalise the independence campaign as the individual will of First Minister Alex Salmond.

Politicians will use whatever tactic they think is effective but broadcasters must not make the mistake of mimicking them.

Any reasonable person knows the aspiration of Scottish independence has been around for far longer than Alex Salmond and is currently backed by one in three Scots – with many more still to make up their minds.

Deputy First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has a leading role in the campaign, as does Patrick Harvie, leader of the Scottish Green Party. The Yes Scotland chief executive is a former journalist, Blair Jenkins, who has no political links. Its convenor is Dennis Canavan, a former Labour MP. Former Labour leaders including Sir Charles Gray and trade unionists such as Tommy Brennan support Yes.

Yet Dr Robertson’s analysis found the BBC presented independence as the personal wish of Alex Salmond 35 times and STV 34 times. The No campaign was NEVER portrayed as the personal view of an individual.

The views of organisations and individuals were also reported without making it clear they had links to the UK government or anti-independence movement.

Voters often say they want more information about independence. Broadcasters have an obligation to bring it to them – in a fair, unbalanced manner. Democracy demands it.

TV bosses must act on Dr Robertson’s findings. Journalists have a moral obligation to hold truth to power. And that includes the powerful Westminster establishment.