Britain faces a period of severe economic turbulence if Scotland votes for independence next week, economists warned, as the prospect of a Yes vote threatened a new financial crisis.

A report from a respected financial advisory firm said that investors were already pulling money out of the UK at the fastest pace since the "credit crisis" of 2008.

CrossBorder Capital said the net flow of capital out of Britain hit £16.8 billion in August, the highest level seen since Lehman Brothers collapsed.

Michael Howell, managing director, said outflows from the UK now look to be intensifying "with the possibility of Scottish independence coming to the front of investors’ minds".

"Sterling outflows have been an issue since the end of June, but they really gathered pace in August," he said.

Meanwhile, a study by Deutsche Bank said a Yes vote for Scottish independence would "go down in history as a political and economic mistake" on a par with Winston Churchill’s decision in 1925 to return the pound to the Gold Standard or the failures by the Federal Reserve in America that triggered the Great Depression in the 1930s.

It warned that Scotland risked a similar depression if voters backed the Yes campaign on Thursday, and described the desire for independence as an "incomprehensible" one which could have negative consequences "far beyond" what people had imagined.

Gordon Brown said the Deutsche Bank report showed that Scotland was "in danger of falling through an economic trapdoor".

With the battle over independence reaching fever pitch on the final weekend of campaigning, George Osborne, the Chancellor, announced he was withdrawing from a crucial G20 summit next weekend because of the risk that a vote for independence in Thursday’s referendum could plunge the UK economy back into turmoil.

Mr Osborne said a Yes vote would have "permanent consequences" for the British economy and announced that he would not attend next weekend’s meeting of finance ministers and central bank governors in Cairns, Australia.

Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England, also announced that he would return early from the meeting to be back in time for the referendum result.

As another opinion poll showed the result on a knife edge, with 51 per cent opposed and 49 per cent in favour, Mr Osborne said they could not be abroad when the result was declared because of the "economic risks" that could immediately follow.

A survey by Bloomberg predicted the pound could tumble as much as 10 per cent in the event of a Yes vote.

On another dramatic day in the independence campaign:

• Warnings about the dire economic consequences of separation intensified, with Britain’s largest mobile phone companies preparing to issue an unprecedented joint statement about the price rises that would follow;

• As David Cameron encouraged more companies to speak out, Sir Richard Branson and the chief executives of Marks and Spencer, the Kingfisher DIY group and the Timpson shoe repair chain added their voices to the chorus of business opposition;

• UBS, the global financial services giant, echoed Deutsche Bank by predicting independence would prompt a recession in a separate Scotland almost on the scale of that which accompanied the collapse of its two major banks;

• The Chinese government appeared to support the No campaign by saying it wanted "stability" in the UK economy;



JIm Sillars (left) warned that there would be a “day of reckoning” for businesses (Rex)

Jim Sillars, the former SNP deputy leader, warned that companies who have opposed separation face a "day of reckoning" after a Yes vote, while Alex Salmond accused the Prime Minister of orchestrating a big business scare campaign against Scots.

Disclosing his decision not to attend the G20 at a press conference, Mr Osborne said: "It’s important given the economic risks of one particular outcome of that referendum that I am here in the UK and the Governor of the Bank of England has independently come to the same conclusion."

Asked if this was a "sign of panic", he said: "It is sensible given we have got this referendum. They don’t come round every month. It’s a very big moment for our country. It’s a very big decision with permanent consequences."

He referred to economic risks highlighted by City analysts, citing a report by Credit Suisse that predicted a separate Scotland would fall into a "deep recession" and would lead to a run on deposits in Scottish-based banks.

In a foreword to the Deutsche Bank report, David Folkerts-Landau, its chief economist, said everyone has a right to self-determination but that some political decisions could have negative consequences far beyond what voters might imagine.

"We feel that we are on the threshold of one such moment. A Yes vote for Scottish independence on Thursday would go down in history as a political and economic mistake as large as Winston Churchill’s decision in 1925 to return the pound to the Gold Standard or the failure of the Federal Reserve to provide sufficient liquidity to the US banking system, which we now know brought on the Great Depression in the US," he said. "These decisions – well-intentioned as they were – contributed to years of depression and suffering and could have been avoided had alternative decisions been taken."

He said the UK’s financial institutions provide stability and certainty but he warned a separate Scotland would have to "severely" rein in spending or increase taxes to establish credibility on the international money markets.

"While it may sound simple and costless for a nation to exit a 300 year-old union, nothing could be further from the truth," he said, before concluding that the economic case for independence was "incomprehensible".

He predicted that the main effects of independence, with uncertainty about its currency, would be that Scottish residents would move their cash and assets to England and financial institutions would also move south.

If Scotland tried to continue using the pound, it would find its interest rates being set by the Bank of England with no regard to Scottish conditions.

Banks in Scotland would have to reduce their lending to shore up their assets and, as result, an independent Scottish government would have to raise taxes to find the money for public spending.

Ongoing uncertainty over what currency an independent Scotland might use in the event of a Yes vote has plagued the referendum, and unsettled major financial institutions.

UBS predicted Scotland’s GDP would nosedive by between 4 and 5 per cent after a Yes vote as the country’s banking sector relocated to England. It said Scottish GDP fell 6.7 per cent in 2009 after the collapse of Royal Bank of Scotland and Bank of Scotland.

Scottish companies and households would suffer "some degree of a credit crunch" without clarity on the currency and the banking system, the report also predicted.

It repeated Mr Carney’s warnings that it would need tens of billions of pounds of reserves to continue using the pound without a formal currency union.

For a separate Scotland to support its currency arrangements, meet its deficit and set up a new state, the report estimated it would need to generate financial reserves of between £50 billion and £72 billion. That is the equivalent of £9,000 to £13,000 per person north of the Border.

Danny Alexander, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, said last night: "The eyes of the world are on the Scottish nationalists and they don’t like what they see. Global financiers UBS are telling the world that if Scotland votes Yes we will be plunged into an economic mess."