At the top of Edinburgh's Abbeymount, where Orange Order marchers congregated at the end of their parade on Saturday, a group of policemen were making their considered assessment of the morning's events: "Some arseholes, but in general a major success".

It is not clear whether they were referring specifically to a group of Britain First neo-Nazis who were making their presence felt by the Scottish parliament building. But the Order's 15,000-strong show of visceral pro-union strength through Scotland's capital was broadly good-natured, though fiercely so.

The march began in Edinburgh's Meadows park, where the grand master of the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland, Edward Stevenson, argued that those who questioned the rally's timing on the weekend before the independence referendum had "demonised the Orange Institution in Scotland". He said Scottish Orangemen were "fully entitled to express their views in a democratic society on such an issue of utmost importance".

There have been serious concerns that the march could inflame sectarian tensions at this volatile political moment. After a 12-year-old spectator was hit in the face with a bottle at an Orange walk in Glasgow this July, pro-UK supporters were worried that any further violence could drive undecided voters towards yes. The official pro-union Better Together campaign has firmly distanced itself from the event.

About 15,000 people, young and old, were believed to have taken part in the Grand Orange Lodge of Scotland march. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod

Marching down the Mound and along the Royal Mile, the clamour of more than 100 pipe and drum bands was at times deafening. Hundreds more spectators had thronged the streets, waving union flags and 'vote no' signs, while bemused tourists strained to capture the spectacle on camera. The marchers themselves were decked out in full regalia, with white gloves, buttons and braiding. Some of the women had made a particular effort, wearing union jack dresses and orange nail polish.

Yvonne Robertson, who had travelled from Glasgow with her district lodge, spoke of "an absolutely amazing day" as her red, white and blue glitter headband sparkled in the sunshine. "The Orange Order get such a bad press. I'm so proud of the Order today, and all the people who have come from England and Northern Ireland to support us. This is a show of strength, to say that we don't want Britain to be broken up."

Although the Northern Irish contingent seemed diminished, perhaps after warnings from senior loyalists to stay away, it was striking how many of the marchers had travelled from England to add their support to the march.

Thomas Salkeld, a retired construction worker from Carlisle, was here with the Abraham Acton VC memorial lodge. He said he was unconvinced by the polls showing a surge in support for independence. "Every Scot I speak to on the border is voting no."

Sharon Findlay, 43, from Hamilton Brother John Stewart memorial lodge 123, said: "We're basically proud to be British; proud to be Scottish and that's it. Nothing else. We need to keep the union. Scotland cannot survive without the union, and we want it for another 300 years."

Wearing her gold tasselled collarette over a bright summer dress, she explained: "We're Christian, we embrace Scotland as a nation but we embrace the UK; we're part of the UK. I don't think that the no vote has really got this across; this [march] has given ordinary no voters the chance to go out and say 'look at us'; this is the chance to come with us. Don't be defeated: stand up and say 'we're proud to be British'."

Andy Nicholls, 51, a supermarket worker from Glasgow's Cowcaddens, was sharply suited – as were the majority of the marching men. "It has brought a bit of pride back to me," he said. "Because everywhere I go you just seem to see yes stuff in windows.

"The SNP is obviously pushing hard. I think that they've got more of a momentum whereas no has said we'll hold onto what we've got and aren't maybe as dynamic, but today has seen not just the Orange people who support what we're standing for.

Nicholls added: "From an Orange perspective we're probably the bottom of the food chain; nobody likes us but we're certainly in the limelight today. What I would like to see is a yes vote getting defeated maybe by 3,000 votes, and then we see how many Orangemen voted no – and that's the number that swung it."

"The Orange Order today has brought people onto the streets. We were always going to vote no but now people on the pavements [watching us] are going home with no posters, badges, flags and stickers. Maybe people will see that the no support is bigger than we think."

On Abbeymount, as the marchers struggled to find friends, children and transport, tempers began to fray in the early afternoon sunshine. Groups of younger members shouted instructions to "get in a couple of cans" before the bus home. But there was a general conviction that the march had achieved what it had set out to, as well as relief that it had, thus far, passed without incident.

Whether undecided voters will be alienated by this particularly pungent flavour of pro-union support, or no voters galvanised, will be evidenced by the end of the week. "It's crazy," said one steward. "They're all marching past the parliament, just to say they're voting no." He shook his head. "Then again, I'm more of a yes man."