Allegations of electoral fraud at polling stations in Glasgow cast a shadow over the Scottish referendum result today.

Police launched an investigation after the city’s council alerted them to 10 suspected cases of voters impersonating other people, allowing them to complete two ballot papers. Under British law, voters are not required to present identification when they take part in an election.

Stewart Hosie, SNP Treasury spokesman at Westminster, said it was “very sad that people feel the need to engage in any kind of impersonation”, adding: “I think that’s a daft thing to do. The ballot papers have been identified, they will be taken away and fingerprinted, the police will do their job and I’m sure whoever has done it will be caught and sentenced.

Scotland goes to the polls







20 show all Scotland goes to the polls





































1/20 Scotland decides Piper Ryan Randall leads a pro-Scottish independence rally in the suburbs of Edinburgh Getty Images

2/20 Scotland decides A "No" campaigner bursts into song as the BBC's Nick Robinson walks past Getty Images

3/20 Scotland decides Chris McAleese holds a Saltire flag as he speaks with Gerrard Corrigan, left, and Robbie Devine outside Bannockburn Polling Station in Scotland AP

4/20 Scotland decides George Mackay and his daughter Anne Mackay run a polling station from their caravan at Coulags near Lochcarron PA

5/20 Scotland decides Voters arrive at the polling station in the village hall in the remote Highland area of Lochcarron, Scotland PA

6/20 Scotland decides A No campaign supporter and Yes campaign supporter debate with each outside the Scottish Parliament building in Edinburgh, Scotland AP

7/20 Scotland decides Martin Greenhouse arrived at Partick polling station wearing a Scottish football jersey with the number 14 - for 2014 - on the back. Martin said that he'd lived in Scotland for years and would be remaining north of border regardless of the outcome tonight. "Westminster does London very well. But not the rest of Britain. Devolution works, independence will work better and the regions of England will take note. That's why my wife and I are voting YES." James Cusick/The Independent

8/20 Scotland decides A supporter of the 'Yes' campaign stands outside a polling station Reuters

9/20 Scotland decides A yes supporter talks with a man and a woman with a Union flag in George Square, just a few hours before polling stations will close in the Scottish independence referendum Getty Images

10/20 Scotland decides Chris McAleese at Bannockburn Polling Station, as voters go to the polls in the Scottish Referendum PA

11/20 Scotland decides Ryan Randall plays the bagpipes outside a polling station in Edinburgh, Scotland Reuters

12/20 Scotland decides Fashion makes a point on voting day in the Scottish Independence referendum in Stirling EPA

13/20 Scotland decides Voters come to Notre Dame Primary School polling station as the people of Scotland take to the polls to decide their country's fate Getty Images

14/20 Scotland decides Voters come to Notre Dame Primary School polling station as the people of Scotland take to the poles to decide their country's fate in a historic vote Getty Images

15/20 Scotland decides First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond chats to school children at Strichen Primary School in Strichen PA

16/20 Scotland decides Former Prime Minister Gordon Brown with No campaigners outside the polling station at North Queensferry Community Centre as polls open PA

17/20 Scotland decides Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond gives the thumbs up after voting in the Scottish referendum in Aberdeenshire, Scotland EPA

18/20 Scotland decides Residents take part in a "short walk to freedom" march in Edinburgh Reuters

19/20 Scotland decides Young voters leave a polling station in Charlotte Square, Edinburgh Reuters

20/20 Scotland decides David Aguilar, left, and Aleix Sarri from Catalonia, who are visiting Scotland to support the Scottish independence referendum, gesture and hold up a placard supporting a Yes vote at passing motorists in Edinburgh, Scotland AP

“That’s the correct procedure. It won’t change the result but of course it shouldn’t have happened, it is a silly, silly, thing for anyone to try to do.”

Colin Edgar, a spokesman for Glasgow City Council’s chief executive, explained how the alleged fraud was uncovered. “Somebody turned up to vote, they gave their name, the presiding officer went to cross off their name on the list of voters to give them a ballot paper and found the name had already been crossed off and a ballot paper had already been issued to someone who apparently had the same name,” he said.

The scale of the fraud appears to be very small, as the number of people registered to vote in Glasgow is 486,219.