Pavel Popescu hasn't added a story.

Hi! My name is Pavel Popescu and i am one of the volunteers that is managing the helping process for the victims of the fireworks accident inside the Colectiv club in Bucharest.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colectiv_nightclub_fire

Our Minister of Health refused any help after the accident claiming that Romania has all the necesary infrastructure to handle it. There is no country in the European Union which can manage more than 15 patients with burns, but because of the political environment, our leaders refused to accept the fact that we need help.

After i found out about their attitude, i got the first plane to Bucharest together with a team of 5 doctors from Norway and Finland, and in less than 24 hours we managed to make an evaluation of most of the critical patients and putting pressure on the minister we managed to transfer them in different hospitals in Europe.

In this moment, there are many patients which are getting treatment in Romania where the conditions inside the hospitals are very bad. We do not have professional kinetotherapy for example and most of them are in need of this treatment. We need professional dressings for burns, we need specials compression garments (costumes) for patients, lotions and many other medical accessories for more than 100 victims. In the future, all this victims will be in need of plastic surgery and professional psychological support.

Unfortunately, our political leaders made them many promises but they do not keep them. We have also 3-4 NGOs who raised money for the victims but did not helped them too much.

I`m kindly ask you to donate for this cause. They are about 150 patients which 3 months ago had a normal life and now they are in suffering. Most of them are very welll educated young people between 18-35 years but we also have teenagers which are facing now a very hard future.

We are a team of 10 volunteers which are connected directly to the victims and their families and our aim is to obtain as many funds for the patiens. We obtained until now two meetings with the Prime Minister and several other meetings with the Minister of Health but we are far away from getting the financial help that these people need. Please donate and help us!

I`m attaching you some links (unfortunately some of them are in romanian) with articles about our team of volunteers called "Comandament Colectiv".

Thank you for the support!

http://www.nineoclock.ro/investigation-into-colectiv-tragedy-continues/

http://www.hotnews.ro/stiri-esential-20578022-interviu-pavel-popescu-romanul-care-mobilizat-tara-preia-raniti-din-colectiv-medic-norvegian-spus-daca-norvegia-intampla-asa-ceva-doua-dimineata-pacientii-trebuia-transferati.htm

https://pressone.ro/colectiv-victime-disperate-stat-neputincios/

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eAj43DRmH4c

http://www.agerpres.ro/social/2016/01/15/guvern-intalnire-a-voluntarilor-din-cazul-colectiv-cu-ministrul-sanatatii-si-seful-cancelariei-premierului-19-41-51