The video will start in 8 Cancel

Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

27 people have died and 184 have been injured in a fire at a packed nightclub.

The tragedy at a night club in the Romanian capital of Bucharest happened during a rock night that featured fireworks.

As many as 400 people - mostly young adults - were attending the concert, and stampeded to the only available exit in the basement venue as it filled with smoke.

TV footage showed police officers and paramedics trying to resuscitate young people lying on the pavement while sirens wailed with more ambulances deployed to the scene.

(Image: Reuters)

(Image: Reuters)

The Colectiv Club's Facebook page said the night's show would feature pyrotechnic effects, and it's believed fireworks exploded inside the venue which then set fire to scaffolding which was supporting the explosives.

A pillar covered with foam panels and the club's ceiling went up in flames and then there was an explosion and heavy smoke.

The scaffolding then fell over onto people who were inside the club.

(Image: Getty Images)

(Image: Reuters)

(Image: REUTERS)

Deputy Interior Minister Raed Arafat said 17 of the 27 dead had yet to be identified and that 146 people remained in hospital.

"Unfortunately, the death toll may change taking into account the severity of their injuries," he said after an emergency meeting early on Saturday.

Many people admitted to hospitals had suffered burn and smoke inhalation injuries or were trampled.

(Image: Getty Images)

(Image: Reuters)

(Image: REUTERS)

"There was a stampede of people running out of the (Colectiv) club," a man who escaped without shoes told Reuters.

A young woman who was released from the hospital after minor injuries described the club bursting into flames.

"In five seconds the whole ceiling was all on fire. In the next three, we rushed to a single door," she told television station Antena 3.

Deputy Prime Minister Gabriel Oprea said a criminal investigation into the causes of the incident was already under way, and the health minister launched a public appeal for blood donations.

Romania's President Klaus Iohannis said in a statement: "I want to assure you of all support from rescuing forces and ask you to trust they put all efforts to limit the impact of this catastrophe."

The government said it would declare three days of national mourning later on Saturday.