Folow us Modifică dimensiunea fontului: Play

Bucharest, Nov 1 /Agerpres/ - French Ambassador in Bucharest Francois Saint-Paul announced on Sunday, while standing in front of the Colectiv club that was ripped through by fire on Oct. 30, that a team of medical experts will arrive in Bucharest from France this evening to help their Romanian peers treat the victims of the blaze.



The Ambassador paid homage to the victims of the fire on Sunday evening, joining the thousands of people who were at the site of the tragedy with flowers and candles.



Saint-Paul announced that some of the best French burn wound experts were arriving, specifically doctor Vincent de Broucker and Professor Marc Chaouat.



They'll first contact Mr. Arafat this evening. I'll personally welcome the team at the airport. We are at the side of the Romanians!, said the French Ambassador in Bucharest.



I'd like to express the most sincere condolences for this tragedy. It's been a real tragedy. I remember Romania's solidarity when the Charlie Hebdo attack took place, and I'd like us to demonstrate today our solidarity. I was astonished and I admired what the Mobile Emergency, Resuscitation and Extrication Service crew, the medics, the police and all the mobilized people have done, as well as Mr. Secretary of State Raed Arafat and Mr. Health Minister Banicioiu. I think everything possible was done and this has been an extraordinary mobilization, said the French diplomat.



The Bucharest mission of the two doctors had been scheduled since long, as part of a cooperation project begun in 2013 for the establishment, with financing from the WB and European structural funds, of four centres specializing in the treatment of severe burns.



Marc Chaouat, from the St. Louis Hospital in Paris is Secretary of the Society for Burn Injuries. Doctor De Broucker is the head of the service of the center for the treatment of burn victims of the Lille regional hospital center. The French team of experts also includes representatives of the French Health Ministry.



The blaze death toll hit 30 on Sunday afternoon; 140 remain hospitalized in various medical facilities, 90 of them in critical and serious condition. AGERPRES