Dozens of people have died in a fire at a nightclub in the Romanian capital Bucharest , thought to have been caused by a firework display which went wrong.

The death toll currently stands at 27, with 180 injured, and hospitals were so overstretched that victims were lying in the corridors.

Foreigners were said to be among those caught up in the accident, but the Foreign Office said it was not aware of any Britons being among the dead.

Photo: EPA

"Some of those being admitted to hospital have burns all over their bodies,” said Sanda Nicola, a locally-based journalist. “Most of the victims were teenagers and students.

"Paramedics say that many of the people involved were foreigners who did not speak Romanian."

Colectiv nightclub

The explosion happened at the Colectiv nightclub in the centre of the city, near to the parliament.

Photo: Lemi Black

The club, which had up to 400 people inside at the time, was due to be open from 9pm local time until 7am, hosting a free rock concert. The band, Goodbye to Gravity, was launching its latest album at the club, called Mantras of War. The show had been due to include a pyrotechnics display. Lemi Black, one of the band members, posted a photo on Facebook which he had taken from the stage, showing hundreds of people inside the room, phones held aloft to take pictures as they played.

Fireworks went wrong

Exactly how the fire broke out is unknown, but Antena 3, a Romanian TV station, said preliminary suggestions were that decorations caught fire.

"It blew something under a pole covered with polystyrene,” said their correspondent on the scene.

Photo: EPA

One witness said that there were fireworks inside the club, then a pillar and the club's ceiling caught fire. An explosion was sparked, and heavy smoke filled the room.

Lemi Black, a member of the band, said that two foam pillars caught fire.

"They then set fire to wood inside the building, which burned everything really quickly," he said. "It was made worse by the fact that the only way out was a relatively small door."

One man, who escaped without his shoes, said: "There was a stampede of people running out of the club."

Hospital overwhelmed

A dozen ambulances rushed to the club, but were unable to cope with all the casualties. Many of the injured took themselves to hospital in cars and taxis.

Photo: Inquam Photos/Reuters

Nicolae Banicioiu, the health minister, made an appeal for blood donations and said the hospital had been “bombarded with severe cases.”

Digi 24, a Romanian news channel, is reporting that the Floreasca Hospital has been overwhelmed.

Medical sources told the channel that the beds are full, there is not a seat to be had, and people are lying on stretchers in the corridors.

A triage centre may be created in a nearby bank, the channel reported.

The interior ministry has declared the situation a "code red emergency", which means all emergency services are involved.

President in mourning

President Klaus Iohannis wrote on his Facebook page that he was "deeply grieved by the tragic events that happened this evening in downtown."

He added: "It is a very sad day for all of us, for our nation and for me personally."