A firework malfunction and subsequent fire at a Bucharest nightclub has killed 27 people and injured over 180 more.

Romanian news channel Digi24 reports that pyrotechnics inside the Colectiv nightclub in Bucharest city centre started a fire, which spread quickly in the small club where over 500 people were attending an album launch party.

The Facebook event page for the party describes the "customized light show and pyrotechnic effects" that had been prepared.

At least 21 dead and 80 injured during a fire caused by an explosion in a club in #Bucharest pic.twitter.com/RK3nI6QHJt — Breaking3zero U.S. (@Breaking3zeroUS) October 30, 2015

After the fire, many Facebook users took to the event page to ask about the whereabouts of friends and relatives who they believed were at the club at the time.

A man who managed to get out of the club said that a crush started as everyone rushed to the exit.

Romanian Interior Minister Gabriel Oprea said 25 people were killed in the fire, and over 80 were injured. The death toll later rose to 27, and is expected to keep mounting as the night goes on. Oprea said the government has established a crisis unit to deal with the response to the fire in the immediate aftermath.

Nightclub in #Bucharest before tragedy killing at least 26, shared by LemiBlack on FB, showing safety concerns pic.twitter.com/UwTUORkFj1 — Michael Bird (@MichaelBirdUK) October 30, 2015

The injured, some of whom are foreigners, have been taken to local hospitals, which are struggling to cope with the huge influx of patients. The Foreign Office has said it is not aware of any British victims at present, but this could change as more becomes known.

Many residents of Bucharest have reportedly flocked to blood donation centres in an effort to help the injured.

Romanian President Klaus Iohannis issued a statement of condolence shortly after the fire

Klaus Iohannis, the President of Romania, issued a statement in which he said he was "shocked and deeply saddened" by the night's events.

He expressed his "full compassion" for the victims and their families, and assured them that everything was being done to improve the situation.