• 180 wounded in blast • Fireworks reportedly caused the fire • Bucharest nightclub fire kills dozens • Foreigners thought to be among the victims • Bucharest prosecutor's office starts criminal investigation

Prosecutors have launched a criminal investigation following a fire at a Bucharest nightclub which has left at least 27 dead and 180 injured.

Flames swept through the Colectiv, where up to 400 people had gathered to hear a rock group, Goodbye to Gravity, launch their new album, Mantras of War.

The show featured a pyrotechnic display, which went disastrously wrong with the fireworks setting the polystyrene décor alight

Panic stricken revellers, some as young as 14, rushed to the exit and at least some of those who died were killed in the stampede.

Photo: EPA

The seriously injured were reported to have included Goodbye to Gravity’s bass player and one other member of the group.

Early this morning the country’s Interior ministry warned the number of fatalities could rise.

According to one eye witness forcing the door open exacerbated the problem with the blast of air from outside turning the fire, in what was a factory during the Communist era, into an inferno.

Another, Victor Ionescu, who was at the club with his girlfriend, painted a graphic picture of the confusion and panic as the fire swept through the building.

“People were fainting, they were fainting from the smoke. It was total chaos, people were trampling on each other.” he said.

Some witnesses said there was an explosion, but this was disputed by other sources.

With many of those inside the club not carrying papers, identifying those who died will be difficult.

Friends and relatives rushed to the scene hoping to find their loved ones alive.

"She's not answering the telephone and she's not saying anything," said a mother, dressed in a black leather jacket, crying in front of television cameras.

"We want information whether he's alive," said a visibly overcome woman, speaking about a family member.

Raed Arafat, the senior disaster official at Romania’s Interior ministry, said the explosion had been a “tragedy without precedent.”

He added: “We have many people with burns, intoxicated with smoke and people squashed.”

Survivors were rushed to hospitals in ambulances and even taxis. Others were treated at a field hospital set up at the scene.

In all 10 hospitals were used, but they were overwhelmed with some victims lying on stretchers in corridors waiting for treatment.

The country’s health ministry launched an emergency appeal for blood donations.

At least some of the victims are understood to have been foreigners, but up to now the Foreign Office has not been made aware of any Britons among the dead or injured.

Victor Ponta, the Romanian Prime Minister, has cut his visit to Mexico short and flying home as a result of the tragedy.

Photo: Inquam Photos/Reuters

He and his ministers are due to hold an emergency meeting later today.

Klaus Iohannis Romania’s President expressed his feelings on his Facebook page, He wrote he was: “deeply grieved by the tragic events that happened this evening in downtown.”

But already there has been some criticism of the time it took the emergency services to arrive, with one activist saying valuable time had been lost.

05.00

The latest reports coming out of Bucharest say that at least 25 of those injured are in a serious condition, confiming fears voiced by the authorities that the death toll could rise.

04.01

As the investigation starts, Romanian ministers are due to hold a meeting later today. But Lucian Lipovan, a local journalist says people are sceptical about how effective any inquiry will be.

There are a lot of clubs which have the same problem. These things could have happened before, it is a miracle it didn’t happen before now

03.37

Victor Ponta, the Romanian Prime Minister, is cutting his visit to Mexico short and flying home as a result of the tragedy.

Photo: AFP/Getty

02.57

The Bucharest public prosecutor's office has just announced that it is opening a criminal investigation into the fire at the nightclub.

02.37

According to Alexandru Alexe, a Romanian social activist, it took only two to three minutes for the fire to break out. The situation was worsened by the stampede and the opening of one of the doors. Speaking on Sky News, he said

The oxygen came in from outside and ignited everything. The effects of this incident are going to go all the way to the top, to the president.

02.15

The head of the Interior Ministry’s Department for Emergency Situations, Raed Arafat set out the gravity of the plight of the victims.

It is a tragedy without precedent and it is an intervention without precedent. At this moment, part of the persons admitted, those taken by ambulance especially, are in grave condition and required intubation, reason for which we needed to relocate ventilators to the hospitals

01.47

More details are emerging of the rescue efforts after the fire erupted. The Romanian state news agency said in addition to fire, police and ambulance teams, a specialist extrication unit was sent to the scene. An emergency mobile hospital was also erected nearby.

Photo: Inquam Photos/Reuters

01.22

Paul Angelescu, a reporter with ProTV, said witnesses had described the club as crowded and they believed the fire was started by the pyrotechnic display.

00.48

Lemi Black, a member of the band, said that two foam pillars caught fire.

They then set fire to wood inside the building, which burned everything really quickly.

It was made worse by the fact that the only way out was a relatively small door.

Photo: EPA

00.34

Victor Ionescu, who was at the club with his girlfriend, told Antena 3 TV by telephone that there were huge flames after the explosion:

People were fainting, they were fainting from the smoke. It was total chaos, people were trampling on each other. It was a tragedy that could have been avoided if there had been more organisation from the emergency services.

00.32

The death toll is now 27, officially, with 180 people wounded.

00.01

This is the scene outside the nightclub in Bucharest:

Photo: Inquam Photos/Reuters

23.53

Fire crew help a victim of the fire:

Photo: EPA

23.46

Video footage of injured victims being treated outside the nightclub:

23.40

Exactly how the fire broke out remains unknown, but Antena 3, a Romanian TV station, said preliminary suggestions were that decorations caught fire.

Their correspondent on the scene said:

It blew something under a pole covered with polystyrene.

23.35

A locally based journalist, Sanda Nicola, said:

Some of those being admitted to hospital have burns all over their bodies. Most of the victims were teenagers and students.

Paramedics say that many of the people involved were foreigners who did not speak Romanian.

23.33

A pillar and the club's ceiling caught fire and then there was an explosion and heavy smoke, one witness told Reuters.

23.14

The Foreign Office says it is not aware of any British casualties at present, but that this may change.

23.12

The explosion happened at the Colectiv nightclub near to the famous Palace of the Parliament.

It was due to be open from 9pm local time until 7am, hosting a free rock concert.

The band Goodbye to Gravity was launching its latest album at the club, called Mantras of War. The show had been due to include a pyrotechnics display.

23.10

The nightclub before the tragedy:

Nightclub in #Bucharest before tragedy killing at least 26, shared by LemiBlack on FB, showing safety concerns pic.twitter.com/UwTUORkFj1 — Michael Bird (@MichaelBirdUK) October 30, 2015

23.03

Local media is reporting that 154 people have been taken to hospital - some of them arriving in private cars and taxis. The death toll has risen to 26.

23.00

Digi 24 is reporting that the Floreasca Hospital has been overwhelmed. Medical sources told the channel that the beds are full, there is not a seat to be had, and people are lying on stretchers in the corridors.

A triage centre may be created in a nearby bank, the channel reported.

The interior ministry has declared the situation a "code red emergency", which means all emergency services are involved.

22.53

Digi 24, which is a Romanian news channel, is reporting that some of the victims are foreigners.

22.51

The health minister is speaking on Digi 24, appealling for blood donations.

22.50

Romania's President Klaus Iohannis wrote on his Facebook page that he was "deeply grieved by the tragic events that happened this evening in downtown."

He added:

It is a very sad day for all of us, for our nation and for me personally.

22.48

Images of people being treated on the streets:

Photo: Antena 3

22.44

Deputy Interior Minister Raed Arafat said the death toll may still climb at the club, which hosted a rock concert attended by up to 400.

A man who escaped the club told Reuters:

There was a stampede of people running out of the (Colectiv) club.

22.40

The Romanian interior ministry has stated the death toll stands at 25. Nationalities are unknown.

22.38

Nicolae Banicioiu, the health minister, said that he could not give official death tolls, but that a crisis unit had been set up.

Everyone was mobilized and try to do everything we can.

We are bombarded with the number of severe cases .

Victims have been sent to the accident and emergency hospitals in the capital.

22.35

Local reports are putting the death toll as high as 40. There has been no confirmation of the death toll.

22.34

Dana Cărbunaru, a reporter for Antena 3 in Romania, said:

Apparently there were several hundred people in the club at the time of the explosion.

It seems that someone had [been] given fireworks at a time, the fireworks have reached the ceiling and wiring had exploded.

22.32

Local reports said fireworks were used inside the club, causing the fire.

22.31

Pictures from the scene are starting to come in:

Photo: Antena 3

22.30

There are reports that the death toll has already risen to 21. Very little information so far about what has happened.

BREAKING: At least 21 dead, 80 wounded in blast at Bucharest nightclub pic.twitter.com/yvqYg5LZnJ #breaking https://t.co/zzY0dbayM3 — SWJ BREAKING NEWS (@Streetwisejnl) October 30, 2015

22.27

Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the news that an explosion in a Bucharest nightclub has killed dozens of people. Follow latest updates here as the story develops.