Shaheed Rumi Squad members and their fellows on fast-unto-death at Shahbagh on Saturday evening urged all students to hold a token hunger strike in their educational institutions, expressing solidarity with the programme seeking a ban on Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir. The squad members, who began their fast-unto-death in front of the National Museum about 10:30pm on Tuesday, at the briefing said that they would send an open letter to the prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, in the 100th hour of their protests. Four of the 20 protesters were, meanwhile, admitted to BIRDEM Hospital after they had fallen sick on the fourth day of the fast-unto-death. Dhaka University student Sadat Hasan Niloy, Dhaka College student Rubayet Dwip, schoolteacher Alif Pradhan and Mipur Bangla College student Shubra Mahmud Jyoti were to hospital by 8:00pm, their fellow strike Syed Faiz Ahmed said. Shahbagh protesters who started rallying in the crossing on February 5 seeking to press home their six-point demands, including death penalty for all war criminals and a ban on Jamaat and Shibir, meanwhile, said that they would submit the signatures collected in support of their demands to the speaker today. Four more protesters on fast-unto-death at Shahbagh were given saline after the had felt weak on Saturday. They are Dhaka University student Mehedi Hasan Shuvro, Dhaka College students Shahidul Haque Ananda, Jahangirnagar University student Quazi Akash and American International University of Bangladesh student Nazmul Haque Bhuiyan. Others are in a stable condition although they felt weak, said Senjuti Shonima Nodi, a member of the squad. Manik Sutradhar, another protester who was earlier admitted to BIRDEM Hospital after he had fallen sick, joined the fast-unto-death again with saline. Seven members of the Shaheed Rumi Squad, named after independence war martyr Shafi Imam Rumi, son of Jahanara Imam who held a people’s trial of war crime suspect Ghulam Azam in 1992, began the fast-unto-death on Tuesday seeking that Jamaat and Shibir should be banned. They began the protests as the government did not initiate any process to ban Jamaat and Shibir by the deadline of March 26 the Shahbagh protests earlier gave the government for the job. ‘We are on the fast-unto-death as the government has not initiated any move to ban Jamaat and Shibir,’ Senjuti said adding that fast-unto-death was the most effective form of a non-violent movement. ‘We seek support of all.’ A group of cultural activists of Ganajagran Sangskriti Mancha early Saturday joined the fast-unto-death for 24 hours. In the evening, they, however, said that they would continue with the hunger strike for 144 hours. Shahbagh protesters, meanwhile, said that they would submit the signatures they had collected in support of their six-point demand, including death penalty for all war criminals and a ban on Jamaat and Shibir, to the speaker. They have plans to walk in a procession towards the national assembly complex from Shahbagh at 11:00am today to submit the signatures to the speaker. Khan Asaduzzaman Masum, an organiser of the Shahbagh protests, said that more than one crore people had joined the mass signature campaign, which ran for a month beginning on February 22, expressing solidarity with their six-point demand. The signatures were collected in all protest venues set up at the call of the Shahbagh protests across the country. The other demands include an early arrest of and action against activists of Jamaat and Shibir threatening a civil war and stern action against political parties, forces, individuals and institutions trying to save war criminals. The protesters also demanded an early arrest of collaborators, who were convicted or faced trial but released after 1975, and their trial in war crimes tribunals. They demanded a ban on all enterprises having links with Jamaat and all cultural institutions run by war criminals. The Shahbagh protests broke out February 5 hours after International Crimes Tribunal 2 sentenced Jamaat’s assistant general secretary Abdul Quader Molla to life in prison, demanding death penalty for all war criminals.

Shaheed Rumi Squad member Senjuti Shonima Nodi speaks at a press briefing at on their programme of fast-unto-death at Shahbagh in Dhaka on Saturday. Ă˘€” Sanaul Haque

Serious crimes, including killing, rape and arson, increased during 2011-12 in comparison to statistics for the previous year, according to government statistics. The Cabinet DivisionĂ˘€™s 2013 yearly report showed...

The Bangladesh Nationalist Party chairperson, Khaleda Zia, on Saturday asked the government to quit in deference to the peopleĂ˘€™s Ă˘€?desireĂ˘€™ and said the public had already shown Ă˘€?no confidenceĂ˘€™ in the incumbents. Addressing a gathering...

An investigation team of the International Crime Tribunal is likely to submit its findings on the crimes against humanity committed by Mir Kashem Ali, central leader of Jamaat-e-Islami, to the tribunal on April 24.

At least 18 private power plants with the potential to generate 1,283MW of electricity are set to miss their commissioning deadlines between June and December as they have failed to arrange financing for the projects, according...

North Korea said on Saturday it was entering a Ă˘€?state of warĂ˘€™ with South Korea in a continuing escalation of angry rhetoric directed at Seoul and Washington, but the South brushed off the statement as little more than tough talk.

A metropolitan magistrate on Friday remanded 16 people including four Pakistani nationals and an ophthalmologist in police custody for different periods in three cases filed with three police stations. The metropolitan magistrate, Joynab...

Finance minister Abul Maal Abdul Muhith on Saturday took a swipe at the media for running what he said were fictitious reports on the ministryĂ˘€™s stance and his remarks on the controversial Hallmark Group.

Freedom fighters on Saturday urged the prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, not to hesitate to ban Jamaat-e-Islami and its student wing Islami Chhatra Shibir. At a briefing at the Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh, Amra Ekatturer Rananganer Muktijoddha...

Shaheed Rumi Squad members and their fellows on fast-unto-death at Shahbagh on Saturday evening urged all students to hold a token hunger strike in their educational institutions, expressing solidarity with the programme seeking a ban on...

A group of United Nations independent human rights experts has called for an immediate stop to violence in Bangladesh and a return to peaceful demonstrations following reported large-scale protests since early February.

The Chapainawabganj and Sirajganj units of 18-party opposition alliance and the Khulna unit of Bangladesh Nationalist Party have called general strikes in the districts for today in protest against killings of alliance...

The government would set aside Tk 6,852 crore for building the much- talked about Padma Bridge in the next fiscal. finance minister AMA Muhith said on Saturday. The government allocated Tk 1,500 crore for the bridge in...

Shahjalal Islami Bank on Friday night filed a case against 11 top executives of Bismillah Towels Limited and former SIB Eskaton branch manager on the charge of embezzlement of about Tk 102 crore from the bank branch.

A secretary-level committee has turned down a proposal for introducing separate pay-scales for the central bank and the state-owned commercial banks, saying it will be tantamount to discrimination against the...

The foreign minister, Dipu Moni, who attended the 11th ministerial meeting of the Asia Cooperation Dialogue in the Tajikistan capital of Dushanbe identified climate change and natural disasters as key challenges...

A police officer of Bagha thana in Rajshahi was suspended on charge of taking bribe from two drug peddlers. The suspended police officer is Shafiqul Islam Shafiq, assistant sub-inspector of Bagha thana.

The Danish Minister for Development Cooperation, Christian Friis Bach, arrives in Dhaka on Monday on a two-day visit. The minister will be accompanied by officials from the Danish ministry for foreign affairs.

The police announced Saturday a sharp jump in sex crimes reported in the Indian capital since the fatal gang-rape of a student and attributed the rise to more confidence among victims to report complaints.