Bangladesh's Rising Voices

Rallies over the sentencing of a war criminal turn into much more.

Storified by The Stream· Tue, Feb 19 2013 09:48:32

For two weeks, Bangladesh has seen a wave of protests. Hundreds of thousands of people - musicians, activists, and even the national cricket team - have taken part. The main rallies have been nicknamed 'Shahbag' after the area in the capital Dhaka where people are gathering.

Abdul Qader MollaAJstream

The protests are in reaction to the sentencing of Abdul Qader Molla, a leader of the Islamist Jamaat-e Islami opposition party, who was handed a life sentence for crimes connected to the 1971 war for independence from Pakistan. They think Molla should have gotten the death penalty.

The protests were initially organised by the Bloggers and Online Activists Network, whose Facebook page is pictured below.

Bangladesh FB event that started it allAJstream

Bangladeshi bloggers and online activists. Feb 6. EPAAJstream

Thousands Protesting Crowd In #Shahbagh in solidarity with bloggers and online activists’ ongoing protests:. http://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/02/10/in-pictures-the-protesting-crow... SAMAD

Although protesters are using Facebook to organise rallies, Twitter is being used as a way to call attention to the Shahbag movement internationally.

@jennbeijing @AJStream The history of #Bangladesh #Pakistan #India #Britain is kind of similar to that of #Lebanon #Syria #France history.Atef abd ar Rahman

@AJStream No regime change likely, therefore not of interest to the international media. #shahbag is very badly ignored.Ishtiaq Rouf

The video below encourages netizens to join the protest in Shahbag.

Shahbag Protest: the callingmaribnsu

Women are also turning out in large numbers at Shahbag, which is also known as Projonmo Chattar, or 'New Generation Platform'.

bangladeshi women chanting peaceful slogansAJstream

This is the face of BanglaDesh. An elderly woman joins the young men and women occupying #Shahbag square in Dhaka. http://pic.twitter.com/rqzbU90rTarek Fatah

Thousands of conservative Bangladeshi women join #Shahbag protests to end political Islam: http://globalvoicesonline.org/2013/02/11/bangladeshi-women-join-shahbag-... via @globalvoicesSALEEM SAMAD

#shahbag - particularly happy n proud to see women safely participating - no bad incident so far - Alhumdulillah. Bros-pls dont let us down.Tahsina Banu

You already know, many women stay @ #Shahbag all night long, no problem with their safety. Here's a report: http://goo.gl/e1KgT #ShahbaghShahbag Square LIVE



In the video below, one of the most famous female activists, Lucky Akter, leads the chanting.

Luckys slogan shahbag 2sylhetnewsonline

The supporters of Molla's party, Jamaat-e Islami, staged counter- demonstrations against his sentencing. They are calling for the release of Molla and his co-defendents.

Jamaat Islami and Chhatra Shibir. Motijhil, Dhaka. Feb 4. EPAAJstream

The youth branch of Jamaat-e Islam, Chhatra Shibir, also participated in the rallies.

Jamaat Islami and Chhatra Shibir. Feb 4. EPAAJstream

Al Jazeera's Stefanie Dekker reported on both sides' continuing protests from Bangladesh.

Protests continue over Bangladesh war crimes trialaljazeeraenglish

On Friday, February 15, protesters were further angered by the death of Rajib Haider, a Bangladeshi blogger who helped organise the Shahbag protests. Following Haider's death, protesters decided to continue holding 24-hour demonstrations. Below is an image of Haider's coffin being carried through the crowds.

News for blogger's death shahbag.orgAJstream

By killing Blogger Rajib you have given birth 100 new bloggers. #shahbag movement will go on till justice is served to all our martyrs. RIP.Shahbag Movement

If the bloggers deny protection it will be VERY BRAVE, so AL can stick their nose 'less' into the movement. #Shahbag This is our movement.Priom

Read more of The Stream's coverage of Haider's death here

Bangladeshi expatriates around the world have expressed their solidarity with the Shahbag protesters.

Shahbag support Wayne State UAJstream

Shahbag support Universitaet UlmAJstream

Netherlands support for ShahbagAJstream

Shahbag protests brought people together to express anger over the sentencing of Molla, but it has also drawn attention to larger problems facing Bangladeshis.

@jennbeijing @AJStream lives are being lost all sides. #Bangladesh needs to focus on real problems we have TODAY to move forward.Atef abd ar Rahman