Saimul Islam Rabbi

banglanews24.com

Atrocious and dreadful crimes were committed during the nine

month-long war of liberation in 1971, which resulted in the birth of

Bangladesh, an independent state.



Some three million people were

killed, nearly quarter million women were raped and over 10 million

people were forced to take refuge in India to escape brutal

persecution at home, during the nine-month battle and struggle of

Bangalee nation.





The perpetrators of the crimes could not be brought

to book, and this left an unfathomable abrasion on the country`s

political awareness and the whole nation.



The general elections of 1970 had made Sheikh Mujibur Rahman , the

leader of the Awami league which bagged 167 seats out of 169 allotted

for East Pakistan, the sole spokesman of the people of East Pakistan

and majority leader in the Pakistan National Assembly.



But the Pakistan civil and military ruling clique had refused to transfer

power to the majority leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his party.

Sheikh Mujib also refused to yield to the pressure put on him for

undue accommodation.



Sheikh`s historic address on 7 March 1971 made

this point quite clear to the Pakistani military junta. Then begun the

civil disobedience movement.



Meanwhile talks started between Mujib and

Yahya to resolve the outstanding issues. While holding talks, the

Pakistani military junta was bringing more troops to Bangladesh and at

the same time wantonly killing innocent civilians all over the

country.



This clearly showed that they were totally insincere about

handing over power to the elected representatives of Bangladesh. No

sooner the talks failed, the genocide began, with the Pakistan army`s

crackdown on the people of East Pakistan on the midnight of 25 March

1971.



The Bengali soldiers serving in the then Pakistan Armed Forces

and para militia forces declared instantly their solidarity with the

people`s liberation war.





It all started with Operation Searchlight, a planned military

pacification carried out by the Pakistan Army started on 25 March,

1971 to curb the Bengali nationalist movement by taking control of the

major cities on March 26, and then eliminating all opposition,

political or military, within one month. Before the beginning of the

operation, all foreign journalists were systematically deported from

Bangladesh. The main phase of Operation Searchlight ended with the

fall of the last major town in Bengali hands in mid May.



According to New York Times (3/28/71) 10,000 people were killed; New

York Times (3/29/71) 5,000-7,000 people were killed in Dhaka; The

Sydney Morning Herald (3/29/71) 10,000 – 100,000 were killed; New York

Times (4/1/71) 35,000 were killed in Dhaka during operation

searchlight.



The operation also began the 1971 Bangladesh atrocities. These

systematic killings served only to enrage the Bengalis, which

ultimately resulted in the secession of East Pakistan later in

December, 1971.



The international media and reference books in English

have published casualty figures which vary greatly; 200,000–3,000,000

for Bangladesh as a whole.

There is only one word for this: Genocide.





A well-known researcher on genocide, R.J. Rummel, in his book

Statistics of Democide: Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1900, states:



“In East Pakistan [General Agha Mohammed Yahya Khan

and his top generals] also planned to murder its Bengali

intellectual, cultural, and political elite.



They also planned

to indiscriminately murder hundreds of thousands of its

Hindus and drive the rest into India.

And they planned to

destroy its economic base to insure that it would be

subordinate to West Pakistan for at least a generation to

come.”



Women were tortured, raped and killed. With the help of its local

collaborators, the Pakistan military kept numerous Bengali women as

sex slaves inside their camps and cantonments. Susan Brownmiller, who

conducted a detailed study, has estimated the number of raped women at

over 400,000.



Role of Local auxiliary forces during the War



The Pakistan government and the military setup number of auxiliary

forces such as the Razakars, the Al-Badar, the Al-Shams, the Peace

Committee etc, essentially to act as a team with the Pakistani

occupation army in identifying and eliminating all those who were

perceived to be pro-liberation, individuals belonging to minority

religious groups especially the Hindus, political groups belonging to

Awami League and Bangalee intellectuals and unarmed civilian

population of Bangladesh. “Bangladesh, formerly East Pakistan, became

independent in December 1971 after a nine-month war against West

Pakistan.



The West`s army had the support of many of East Pakistan`s

Islamist parties. They included Jamaat-e-Islami, still Bangladesh`s

largest Islamist party, which has a student wing that manned a

pro-army paramilitary body, called Al Badr.”



Jamat E Islami (JEI) and some other pro-Pakistan political

organizations substantially contributed in creating these

para-militias forces (auxiliary force) for combating the unarmed

Bangalee civilians, in the name of protecting Pakistan.



Actions in concert with its local collaborator militias, Razakar, Al-Badar and

Jamat E Islami (JEI) and other elements of pro-Pakistani political

parties were intended to stamp out Bangalee national liberation

movement and to mash the national feelings and aspirations of the

Bangalee nation.



Fox Butterfield wrote in the New York Times- January

3, 1972 that “Al Badar is believed to have been the action section of

Jamat-e-Islami, carefully organized after the Pakistani crackdown last

March”



In the War of Liberation that ensued, all people of East Pakistan

wholeheartedly supported and participated in the call to free

Bangladesh but a small number of Bangalees, Biharis, other

pro-Pakistanis, as well as members of a number of different

religion-based political parties, particularly Jamat E Islami (JEI)

and its student wing Islami Chatra Sangha (ICS), Muslim League,

Pakistan Democratic Party(PDP) Council,Muslim League, Nejam E Islami

joined and/or collaborated with the Pakistan occupation army to

aggressively resist the conception of independent Bangladesh and most

of them committed and facilitated the commission of atrocities in

violation of customary international law in the territory of

Bangladesh.



Bangladesh International Crimes Tribunal: Make Justice through Fair Trials



The massive atrocities committed during the nine-month 1971 conflict,

from which Bangladesh emerged as an independent State, still haunt the

country and efforts to finally bring justice are essential for

Bangladesh to moving forward without the heavy burden of a

long-standing culture of impunity.



The hundreds of thousands of victims and survivors deserve that justice is done and seen to be done. As with any conflict, the senseless loss of life and human

suffering was experienced on all sides.



All those who suffered during the conflict have a right to see justice through an independent and impartial judicial process.



Even after four decades, the call for justice is shared not just by

the victims of atrocities, but by the whole of Bangladesh, as a

country. The establishment of an International Crimes Tribunal (ICT)

was a key promise on the basis of which the BLA-led Grand Alliance

received a strong popular mandate and Bangladesh’s commitment to

justice was reaffirmed when it became the first South East Asian State

Party to the International Criminal Court in 2010.





The ICT, which began its work in March 2010, has an historic mission

to close this traumatic chapter and redress the historical burden of

atrocities that has accompanied Bangladesh since its birth as a

country.



It can fulfill this mandate by bringing to justice those who

ordered and committed wide-scale atrocities; providing acknowledgement

and redress to countless victims; and creating an undeniable factual

record of the events that reflects the real experiences of all

affected communities.



To keep the promise of justice for the thousands of victims and their

families that the ICT’s establishment represented, Bangladesh needs

immediately and categorically to exclude the death penalty for

individuals accused before the ICT and ensure that the trials are

conducted in a fair and transparent manner.





Shahbag Protest



“ The Shahbag Mass Movement of 2013 in Bangladesh began on Tuesday

February 5, 2013 in Dhaka Bangladesh with the demand of capital

punishment for Abdul Quader Molla and all the other accused war

criminals of the 1971 Liberation War of Bangladesh People of all ages

have been gathering in Shahbag everyday to express solidarity with the

peaceful nonviolent movement.



Abdul Quader Mollah was charged with

abetting the Pakistani army; actively participating in the 1971

atrocities in Bangladesh; rape (including the rape of minors); and

mass murder of Bangladeshis in the Mirpur area of Dhaka during the

Liberation War of Bangladesh.



The many grievous attrocities committed

by Abdul Quader Mollah during the liberation war earned him the

nickname of Mirpurer Koshai ( Butcher of Mirpur) .



On February 5, 2013, the International Crimes Tribunal of Bangladesh sentenced Abdul Quader Mollah to life in prison after he was proved guilty in five out of the

six charges against him.



Within hours of the verdict, mass discontent

broke out in Bangladesh where most people were expecting capital

punishment for Mollah.



The bloggers and online activists gave voice to

the public opinion and called for a mass demonstration at the Shahbag

intersection in central Dhaka. People from all walks of life

spontaneously joined the protest and the demonstration culminated into

the 2013 Shahbag movement.



The Shahbag intersection is currently being

referred to as "Projonmo Chottor" "New Generation Circle" in English -

after the new generation credited with initiating such a spontaneous

yet robust movement.



It has also been referred to as Shahbag Square in

a nod to the historic and revolutionary events which unfolded in

Tahrir Square in Egypt.



Thousands have been holding day and night

vigils at Shahbag refusing to leave until Mollah and other war

criminals get capital punishment.





Source:

i. http://bangladeshwatchdog1.wordpress.com/razakars/

ii. The Economist : Jul 1st 2010:

http://www.economist.com/node/16485517?zid=309&ah=80dcf288b8561b012f603b9fd9577f0e

iii. Bangladesh Documents Vol. II page 577, Ministry of External

Affairs, New Delhi

iv. Niccolo’ Figa-Talamanca, Secretary General of No Peace

Without Justice, Nicola Giovannini, President of "Droit au Droit"

v. Wikipedia



BDST: 1300 HRS, FEB 16, 2013

EAP; eic@banglanews24.com