Activists of Jamaat-e-Islami and its front organisation clashed again with the police in Dhaka, Rajshahi, Sylhet, and other parts of the country on Saturday at the news of the death of an Islami Chhatra Shibir activist. Shibir activist Badiuzzaman, who was wounded with bullets in the eye and the head in a clash with the police in Jaipurhat on November 5, died from his injuries in Islami Bank Central Hospital in Dhaka on Saturday morning Badiuzzaman was also accused in a case filed the police filed in connection with the November 5 clash in Jaipurhat. On Saturday, at least 80 were injured in the violence in the districts. Jamaat men damaged several vehicles, including a police van, in the afternoon. Fifteen policemen were also injured. At Senpara Parbata of Kafrul in Dhaka, Shibir activists attacked a police convoy and damaged several vehicles, including two police vans, in the afternoon, leaving 11 policemen injured. ‘Some young people, standing on the road attacked our convoy when it was passing through Senpara Parbata in the afternoon,’ Mirpur division deputy commissioner of police Imtiaz Hossain said. The police picked up seven to eight people from the place. In Rajshahi, at least 25 people, including policemen, were injured in a clash with Shibir in the afternoon.. Witnesses said that several hundred Shibir activists had brought out a procession from the Jhautala crossing at Lakshmipur about 5:30pm while the police fired teargas shells and charged at them with truncheons. The Jamaat men also pelted the police with stones and the police picked up at least 10 activists of the party. In Jessore, the police clashed with Shibir activists when they brought out a procession at Bejpara in the town in the afternoon in protest at the death of their activist, the New Age correspondent said. The police dispersed the protesters by charging at them with truncheons. Six were arrested, witnesses said. In Sylhet, at least 20 people, including five policemen, were injured as Shibir activists clashed with the police in the city in the afternoon. Security has, meanwhile, been heightened in the capital to head off any subversive activities by activists of Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir. The police were trying to track activists who were accused of attacking the police and burning vehicles in November 5–6, law enforcers said. A large number of police and Rapid Action Battalion personnel were deployed at strategic points such as Paltan, Motijheel, Malibagh, Arambagh, Fakirapool, Gulistan, Segun Bagicha, Gulshan and Banani to fend off any possible violence by Jamaat and Shibir activists in Dhaka. Law enforcers in plain clothes kept vigil on key points. The home minister, Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir, urged people to capture Jamaat and Shibir men wherever they were found and hand them over to the police. He said that the police showed the highest degree of patience after being attacked by Jamaat-e-Islami and its student front for four consecutive days. But the police would show no more restraints, he said. The deputy commissioner of police, Masudur Rahman, told New Age that the Dhaka Metropolitan Police had taken adequate measures to head off any untoward incidents. In clashes in November 5–6, 156 policemen were injured and at least five vehicles were damaged and another vehicle was burnt during the clashes. About 1,500 activists have so far been arrested for creating chaos across the country. The police filed 60 cases against more than 6,000 leaders and activists of Jamaat and Shibir. In Chandpur, at least 20 people, including five policemen, were injured in a clash between Jamaat and the police at the local bust stand in the town in the afternoon, according to the United News of Bangladesh. Jamaat men pelted the police with stones and the police fired teargas shells and rubber bullets to disperse them. Nine were picked up.

Activists of Jamaat-e-Islami and its front organisation clashed again with the police in Dhaka, Rajshahi, Sylhet, and other parts of the country on Saturday at the news of the death of an Islami Chhatra Shibir activist.

Bangladesh Road Transport Authority does not cancel the registrations of ‘permanently unfit and destroyed motor vehicles’ flouting the Motor Vehicles Ordinance. BRTA also does not keep any record of such vehicles, which also constitutes a violation of...

The Bangladesh Nationalist Party chairperson, Khaleda Zia, on Saturday said that the Awami League was covertly trying to establish links with the Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami over its plan to hold the next general elections under the ruling party.

The sharp increase in power purchase from the private sector continues against the rise of overall production as private plants generated 56.72 per cent of the total amount of power in fiscal year 2011-12.

The government is likely to drop the prime minister’s economic adviser, Mashiur Rahman, from the negotiation committee on the proposed Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant to be built with Russia’s assistance, said officials.

Pakistan marked ‘Malala Day’ Saturday on a global day of support for the teenager shot by the Taliban for promoting girls’ education, but in her home town security fears meant schoolmates could not honour her in public. Taliban hitmen shot Malala Yousafzai...

Finance minister AMA Muhith on Saturday said it was not Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen, but he who made the remarks about Nobel Laureate Muhammad Yunus which were ‘misinterpreted by a section of...

The prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, has reiterated her determination to complete the trial of war criminals, saying that none could save the 1975 culprits who committed crimes against humanity during the War of Liberation.

Chief US spymaster David Petraeus, who gained international notoriety as military commander in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, has resigned over an extramarital affair, bringing an abrupt and ignominious end to...

Belarus prime minister Mikhail Myasnikovich will arrive in the capital today on the second leg of his three-nation tour. During his visit, Dhaka and Minsk will sign several documents, including promotion and mutual...

At least 15 people, including a journalist, were injured in a clash between the ruling Awami League’s student front Bangladesh Chhatra League and the main opposition BNP’s student front Jatiyatabadi Chatra...

Visiting Indian minister for health and family welfare Ghulam Nabi Azad has said the relations between Bangladesh and India are now stronger than any time in the past. Azad made the comments when he made a courtesy call on the prime minister...

The Anti-Corruption Commission said that it has begun an inquiry into alleged pilferage at Power Development’s 50-MW peaking power plant at Baghabari in Sirajganj. PDB uses peaking power plants to generate...

The Indian police arrested 48 illegal Bangladeshi immigrants working as construction wokers at various sites in Wadala TT area in central Mumbai on Friday. The Special Branch of the Mumbai police on...

The president, Thein Sein, and opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi must show ‘moral leadership’ if Myanmar is to stem communal violence between Muslims and Buddhists, the International Crisis...

Candidates applying for the medical and dental admission test for the 2012–13 session can collect their admit cards from the web site of the health services directorate general. Additional director general of health...

The Border Security Force of India abducted a Bangladeshi youth from Biddyabagish border under Fulbari upazila of Kurigram Saturday afternoon, official sources said. The victim was Krishna Chandra Roy...

At least 100 people were injured when the tin roof of a school building collapsed at Ramu in Cox’s Bazar on Saturday as people climbed on it during a rally organised by BNP. The local people said the incident...