Militant activists of Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir went on the rampage in the capital and other major cities and towns, including Chittagong, on Monday attacking police, smashing shop windows and damaging vehicles. Police used tear gas and fired rubber bullets to disperse the violent agitators in Dhaka and other cities. The Jamaat-Shibir men also clashed with the police in Dinajpur, Rajshahi, Khulna, Bogra and Faridpur towns to press for ‘dismantling’ of the war crimes tribunals and release of their top leaders facing the trials on charges of crimes against humanity in 1971. Home minister Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir told reporters that the law enforcers were given necessary instructions to prevent recurrence of such violence as attackers even reached up to the secretariat on the day. He said 48 Shibir activists were rounded up on the day and they would be brought to justice. Witnesses said Shibir activists struck terror in the capital’s commercial hub Motijheel in the morning pouncing on the police on duty and torching vehicles. Wielding hockey sticks, several hundred Shibir men rampaged through Motijheel, Dainik Bangla intersection, Bangabandhu National Stadium area and the vicinity of the secretariat, police and witnesses said. They damaged buses, cars and SUVs indiscriminately causing panic among the office goers in the morning rush hours, witnesses said. The witnesses said the violence continued until police reinforcements backed by armoured cars arrived. During the half-an-hour vandalism, the Shibir men damaged at least 50 vehicles and torched four others at Motijheel, GPO, Zero Point and the secretariat area. The Shibir men also attacked and damaged a protection car of the finance minister leaving a constable injured. More than a dozen shops were vandalised by the demonstrators. About 20 people, including 12 police men were injured in the clashes, said Motijheel division deputy commissioner Anwar Hossain. He admitted that they had no prior information of the attack. At least 50 Shibir leaders and activists were arrested at Motijheel, the police said. Some bottles containing petrol and sticks were seized from the Shibir men. During interrogation, the detained Shibir men admitted that they had brought a number of fellow activists from outside the capital to carry out the attacks on the day. Police reinforcements and armoured cars were deployed at different strategic points in the capital after the violence. In Chittagong at least 12 police men were injured in sudden attacks by Jamaat-Shibir activists in Kotwali area and Banshkhali in the morning. Witnesses and police said the activists had brought out a procession from Chambal Bazaar area under Banshkhali upazila around midday. The militant activists started hurling stones when police tried to stop the marchers. At one point, the Jamaat-Shibir men pounced on the police with sticks leaving at least 10 police men injured. Police fired in the air to disperse the demonstrators. The police arrested Jamaat’s Banshkhali upazila ameer Zahirul Islam after the violence. In Chittagong city, two constables of Kotwali police station, Mohammad Jamal and Masud Karim, sustained injuries when Shibir activists hurled stones at a police car. New Age correspondent in Dinajpur said Jamaat-Shibir activists had attacked police and damaged two police pick-up vans during demonstrations at Munshipara of the town at about 11:00 am. Police sub-inspector Mamun and two constables were injured in the attack. Our Rajshahi correspondent said Shibir activists had clashed with the police in Binodpur area of the city in the morning leaving 18 injured, including three police men. Police arrested five Shibir activists in raids in the city. Witnesses said that Shibir activists at Binodpur Bazaar adjacent to the Rajshahi University campus brought out a procession at around 10:00am demanding release of Jamaat leaders. Police fired rubber bullets and tear gas to disperse the stone-throwing Shibir men. Eighteen people were injured in the clashes. New Age correspondent in Khulna reported that Jamaat-Shibir activists had staged protests at Gallamari, three kilometres from Khulna city. The demonstrators were dispersed by the police. The authorities asked the law enforcers not to allow any processions or rallies by Jamaat-Shibir in Khulna city. In Faridpur, Asrafuzzaman Dulal, district correspondent of daily Sangram, was detained by Kotwali police at Janata Bank crossing of the town in the morning. Witnesses said that he was taking snaps of the clashes between Shibir men and police at about 10:30am when the police detained him. Dulal was first taken to the DB office and later kept in the Kotwali police custody.

Top, a demonstrator attacks police men who try to save themselves and, bottom, a police pick-up goes up in flames when the activists of Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir went on the rampage at Motijheel in Dhaka on Monday. — New Age photo

Militant activists of Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir went on the rampage in the capital and other major cities and towns, including Chittagong, on Monday attacking police, smashing shop windows and damaging vehicles. Police used tear gas and fired rubber bullets to disperse the violent agitators in Dhaka and other cities.

Bangladesh and India on Monday singed the much-talked about Extradition Treaty in Dhaka to facilitate transfer of persons wanted on criminal charges in either country on request. The two sides also signed the Revised Travel Arrangements...

Garment labour leaders on Monday issued a 72-hour ultimatum to the government to arrest the owners of Tazreen Fashions Ltd and Smart Export Garments Ltd or face tough agitation programmes like strike and road blockade.

Election commissioner Zabed Ali on Monday expressed his fear over legal complexities in election process if the next parliamentary election is is held before dissolution of parliament in line with the existing constitutional provision.

Some ministers on Monday expressed their reservations about the Extradition Treaty signed between Bangladesh and India on Monday. They said the government had better taken time to examine the provisions.

A state of emergency came into force on Monday in three Egyptian provinces hit by deadly rioting, as the president, Mohamed Morsi, scrambled to contain deepening divisions with calls for a national dialogue. Morsi late on Sunday...

Finance minister AMA Muhith at an emergency meeting with senior government officials on Monday took stock of alternative costs of implementing the stalled Padma Bridge project, said an official. Muhith discussed...

The dismissed teacher of Shaheed Bir Uttam Lt Anwar Girls’ College has been on the run along with his family since Saturday while students of the institution demanded his arrest for alleged molestation of a secondary schoolgirl.

War crimes accused Delwar Hossain Sayedee’s lawyers on Monday completed their closing arguments for the second time saying that the prosecution failed to prove a single charge against their client.

Finance minister Abul Maal Abdul Muhith on Monday termed the incidence of one of his police escorts getting injured by Islami Chhatra Shibir activists running amok near the secretariat ‘a kind of intelligence failure’.

Thailand will turn away any more Rohingya boat people from neighbouring Myanmar who try to land on its shores, a top official said Monday after an influx of refugees fleeing sectarian unrest. ‘The Thai navy from...

The Bangladesh Nationalist Party chairperson, Khaleda Zia, on Monday night held a meeting with leaders of the ‘18-party’ alliance to discuss the next course of action in the opposition’s movement. In the meeting the alliance leaders made...

A parliamentary panel in a meeting on Monday expressed concern at political activities of physicians and healthcare professionals at the grassroots, keeping aside delivering services to the people.

The UK police have detained a Bangladeshi expatriate for his alleged involvement with the abduction of a British and a Dutch journalist in civil war that ravaged Syria. 31-year-old Najul Islam, who lives in Stratford, was nabbed from...

The Border Security Force of India picked up four Bangladeshis at Goainghat frontier in Sylhet Monday noon on charge of crossing the borderline. Identity of the detained Bangladeshi could not be ascertained immediately...

A bipartisan group of US senators has agreed on an immigration reform plan that would provide a path to citizenship for the 11 million illegal immigrants in the United States but only after borders are better secured.

Chittagong University on Monday suspended an associate Professor Chandan Kumar Poddar on charges of an attempted rape. Poddar was with the university’s Statistics Department. The police detained Poddar on...

A Landing Craft Vehicle Personnel, built at Khulna Shipyard Limited at a cost of Tk 16 crore, was handed over to the Bangladesh Army on Monday. Army chief General Iqbal Karim Bhuiyan was present as the chief guest during the handing over ceremony.

Thailand’s labour minister on Monday backed the fishing industry’s idea that its acute labour crisis could be eased by importing manpower from Bangladesh. The National Fisheries Association of Thailand...

A ward councillor of Meherpur municipality was shot dead by miscreants at Kasaripara in the district headquarters Monday night. The ward 8 councillor, Abdullah Al Mamun Bipul, also a former secretary of Juba League, was...

Some important documents of a Tk 314 crore education project have reportedly been damaged at the storehouse of the Directorate of Secondary and Higher Education and a file of the project has gone missing from the...