Mon, 11/02/2013 - 4:44pm | by Hisham Bin Mustafa

Dhaka, Priyo.com: Thousands of people gathered at a sit-in at Shahbagh in the capital for a week, opposing ICT-2 verdict of Jamaat leader Abdul Quader Mollah for war crimes.

The gathering started when the post by Bloggers and Online Activists Network (BOAN), requesting everyone to meet at Shahbag was highlighted in the facebook.

Sit-in people, that started on Tuesday (February 5, 2013) afternoon, demand capital punishment to the war criminal.

Shahbagh intersection has gained the names such as "Nobo Juddho Square", "Prajanma Chattar" among people.

People kept thronging in a large number there since Wednesday morning as per the declaration on the previous day to hold a rally.

The demonstrators chanted slogans all day long and chorused with several patriotic songs. People here and there sang, "Maago vabna keno,amra tomar shanti priyo shanto chele", and many other motivational songs.

A procession under the banner of Dhaka University Teachers and Students reached there at 10:30am to express solidarity with the demonstration.Mostly young generation, along with University teachers and students, journalists, cultural and political activists, mounted at the intersection.

Local people gradually participated in the movements days passed.

Earlier,International Crimes Tribunal-2 sentenced Quader Mollah to life term imprisonment which was unexpected to many as they were certain a death sentence for his crimes against humanity during the country's Liberation War in 1971.

Mollah, also known as Mirpurer Koshai, was proved guilty of committing genocide, murder and rape during the liberation war.

The protestors threatened to continue their programme until the demand is met, terming the current verdict unacceptable.

People from different professions including cultural activists, journalists and bloggers and several facebook groups joined the programme blocking the Shahbagh intersection in the city.

Day 1:

Quader Mollah's Verdict:

On Tuesday, ICT-2 verdict's on the war crimes case against Jamaat leader Abdul Quader Mollah declared life imprisonment in two cases, 15 year jail in 3 cases and one case is not proven in six specific charges for his alleged involvement in murders and mass killings during the Liberation War in 1971.

Prior to the ICT verdict against Mollah, Jamaat-e-Islami enforced a countrywide dawn-to-dusk hartal at 6am today (Tuesday).

People's protest against the verdict at Shabag intersection:

The mass uproar at Shahbag started just a few hours of the verdict when an online activists’ group, Blogger and Online Activists Network (BOAN), gave a call through online social networks to wage protests against the verdict.

Opposing the verdict hundreds of people gathered at Shabagh intersection which later turned into a "nation-rise" rally, as people of all classes joined and participated against ICT-2 judgement.

Read more about Day 1

Day 2:

The protest resumes from Tuesday afternoon when the sit-in started as an online activists’ group, Blogger and Online Activists Network (BOAN), gave a call through online social networks to wage protests against the verdict against Quader Mollah.

Dawn-to-dusk hartal called by Jamaat-e-islami Wednesday.

The demonstrators painted streets, drew cartoons and hanged effigies of war crime suspects including Mollah at Shahbagh with a vow to sustain their protest until their demand is met.

Read more about Day 2

Day 3:

The energetic crowd at city’s Shahbag that was surging with vigour in the grand demonstration:

The three-day mature mass sit-in began with a rally at the centre of the Shahbagh intersection, now renamed Prajanma Chattar, around 8:00am with the banners of Bloggers and Online Activist Network and the Dhaka University Teachers-Students holding up.

A play ‘Onoitik Hasi’ (immoral smile) was staged there by Piron Das theatre group.





Speaking at the rally, the organizers urged the political parties and its associate bodies not to carry their banners in the area.

Several effigies of Quader Mollah were also burned near the Prajanma Manch.

Muktijodhha Sangsad Shantan Command, a platform of the children of freedom fighters, launched a mass-signature campaign on a large white clothe to press for the demand.

Second day of grand demonstration on Friday:

Similar demonstration will take place on Friday as well. Including today this will be a three day procession that is held only to protest the verdict of Abdul Quader Mollah.

Read more about Day 3

Day 4:

Boycott Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir:

The elated protesters from all race, religion and community on Friday demanded ban on Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Chhatra Shibir.

They also promised to boycott all the commercial establishments and social, cultural and other organizations, including media outlets, educational institutions and coaching centers of the Islamist party.

The protesters were reminded that Jamaat-Shibir uses the money in subversive activities that are earned from these business establishments in the country.

On Friday, Dhaka University Vice Chancellor AAMS Arefin Siddique, Sector Commanders’ Forum vice president KM Shafiullah, journalist Kamal Lohani, eminent writer and Prof of Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Mohammed Zafar Iqbal, Jahangirnagar University VC Dr Anwar Hossain, writer Anisul Haque, Mily Rahman, wife of Birsreshta Matiur Rahman, cultural personality Hasan Imam, BSMMU VC Prof Dr Pran Gopal Dutta, Prof Anu Mohammad, Shaon Mahmud , daughter of martyr Altaf Mamud, and leaders of different socio-cultural and youth and student bodies, spoke on the occasion.

Kobir Shumon tributes a song:

The lines are:

বিমানে উড়তে তিরিশ মিনিট

এতো কাছে তবু দূর

বিলকুল নেই পাসপোর্ট ভিসা

সীমানা চেনেনা সুর।

সীমানা চিনিনা আছি শাহবাগে

আমার গীটারও আছে ,

বসন্ত আজ বন্ধুরা দেখো

গণদাবী হয়ে বাঁচে ।

বাঁচো গণদাবী , বাঁচো গণদাবী

আসল বিচার চাই,

যার যা পাওনা তাকে সেটা দাও

গণদাবী একটাই...

The Oath

Convener of the Bloggers and Online Activists Network, Imran H Sarker conducted an oath at Shahbagh on Friday afternoon. Click the link below to read the oath.

At the end of the day, the protesters called to continue the procession until their demand is met.

Read more about Day 4

Day 5:

Government takes steps to go for a correction in the ICT law 1973,21 section-2.

In the original law of 1973, there was no provision of appeal against the verdict of the International Crimes Tribunal set up to try war criminals of 1971. In an amendment, this government gave the accused right to appeal against a verdict with the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court.

More than 100 hours passed off

Although five days passed off (more than 100 hours), the protesters were seen as prompt as before.

Some of the renowned journalist of Bangladesh media set up a cage and raise their voice for the punishment of war criminals.

On Saturday, more organizations and individuals expressed solidarity with the demonstrators.

They expressed gratitude and respect to the young generation for reviving the Liberation War drive.

Read more about Day 5

Day 6:

Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina on Sunday's Parliament session appreciated the vigorous spirit of the youths. In her speech she assured that the demand of people has to be materialized, as they think the verdict is unfair.

"If there’s any weakness in the law, we’ll amend it to make the International Crimes Tribunals (ICTs) stronger,” she said.

The Prime Minister also said she is with the demand of the youths to give capital punishment to all war criminals. “Now I can die with peace in my mind that a generation grows in the country who can lead the nation with the spirit of the Liberation War,” she said.

Regarding continuation of the war crime trial, Hasina said no one will be able to stop the trial process. “If it takes my life, I’ll continue it,” Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina said.

People set up 'gallows' to ask for capital punishment of war criminal Abdul Quader Mollah.

A ‘gallows’ had been constructed at the 'Prajanma Chattar' roundabout and more and more people are pouring in to witness mock executions.

A young kid spoke out during the protest against war criminals, the 7th March Speech given by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. It grabbed the attention of thousands as each tone and note sounded like the Bangabandhu's speech. People everywhere were shocked and stunned, yet delighted, to witness the future generation being so firm and gallant to protect motherland.

Earlier in the noon, few players from National cricket team joined the stream of demonstration at Shabagh, which was led by Bangladesh Cricket Board President Nazmul Hasan (MP). Former players like Habibul Bashar and Akram Khan also attended the troop of Mushfiq, Mashrafe, Ashraful, Razzak, Nasir, Elias, Bijoy, Shohagh, Mominul and others.

BPL T20 team Duronto Rajshahi separately participated in the protest later, led by the owner of the team.

Few well-known bands like Artcell, Cryptic Fate, Dreek, Mechanix, etc. catalyzed the voices of the demonstrators with patriotic and own numbers.

At around 10pm, a rumor stimulated through the crowd at Shahbag that the pioneer of the protest, Laki Akhter, is being hospitalized. At 11.45 PM, the strong voice of Laki was heard saying-"Sit down, this protest is everyone's protest.."

Afterwards she said-"There's been an incident, I was hit by someone I didn't see, but my fellow friends are saying they will trace him down...but this shouldn't impact our protest...."

Witnesses said last night around 10pm one of the leaders of Awami League came at Prajanma Chattar. Laki took the microphone saying no one is allowed to deliver any kind of political speech. A student leader snatched away the microphone from her, then someone hit Laki in the head from the crowd, and Laki fell down.she was carried to BIRDEM and was treated there.

Laki Akhter is the leader of CHATRA UNION at Jagannath University. She is the pioneer of this whole protest, yesterday she was quite tired, and at afternoon she went to BIRDEM to recieve treatment. As she was feeling good afterwards, she came back for slogans at around 9.30PM.

Over the world, Bangladeshi citizens took part in regional protests sharing the feelings of Shabag movement. They demanded the verdict of Quader Mollah to be revised.

Day 7:

The morning session of the procession started as the other days with people accumulating at the centre of the 'Prajanma Chattar'.

As the day passed students from nineteen schools and colleges joined the demonstration.

The name of the institutions were announced in the mic, some renowned names were Notredame College, Bangladesh Commerce College, B.F. Shahin College, Razarbag Police Line School and College, Wills Little Flower School & College, Tejgaon College, Dhanmondi Boys High School, Tejgaon Women College, Birsreshtho Munshi Abdur Rauf School & College, Sheikh Borhan Uddin College, Gulshan Commerce College, Dhaka Polytechnic Institute, Badrunnesa Collge, Government Bangla College, BKSP and Nobokumar Institute.

Regarding the event ahead, the demonstrators requested everyone to dress in black for 'Pohela Falgun'.

On the other hand, 32 Closed circuit camera (CCTV camera) were installed in Shahbag perimeter to ensure safety for the demonstrators.

Amended ICT act gets cabinet's approval :

The cabinet approved the proposal to amend Section 21 (2) of the International Crimes (Tribunals) Act, 1973, to ensure equal facilities for both the prosecution and the defence to appeal.

In its weekly meeting chaired by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, the cabinet cleared the draft of the proposed bill of the Law Ministry.

Earlier on Sunday Law Minister Barrister Shafique Ahmed told reporters that after approval of the cabinet, the bill will be placed before the Parliament as soon as possible for passage during its current session.

Shahbag protesters called upon the countrymen to observe a three-minute silence from 4:00pm on Tuesday to press home their demand for death penalty for war criminals.

Day 8:

It has been a week since protesters gathered at Shahbag in demand of capital punishment for war criminals. Since then thousands are pouring in everyday to show their support on this matter. We are bringing you all the latest updates on the issue.

Film fraternity Ananta & Barsha is coming at Shahbag square today to participate in the demonstration. Ananta said he was willing to participate in the demonstration for quite a while now.

He termed the word "Razakar" into a new meaning in Facebook, according to him, those who criticize the Bengali film industry are in same line as the war criminals are.

Shahbag protesters have called upon the countrymen to observe a three-minute silence from 4:00pm on Tuesday to press home their demand for death penalty for war criminals.

Read more: From Day 2 to Day 8

Popular Slogans

The people together chanted slogans everyday such as – "Tomar Amar Thikana,Padma,Meghna,Jamuna", "Fashi chai, Fashi Chai", "Shawdhin Banglai Razakarder Thai Nai", "Tui Rajakar", "Jamaat-e-Islam- Made in Pakistan", "Pakistaner Pretattha- Pakistan e Firey ja", "Quader Mollah -Nebo Tomar Kolla". "Fasi Hobe Banglay - Mati hobe Pakistan a".

Prajanma Chattar Bulletin

View more photos of Shahbagh demonstration

Our best efforts will remain to give you more updates of the gathering.