A silence stronger than words

People spontaneously express solidarity with Shahbagh protesters by standing up for 3-minute silence at a street in front of Secretariat in the capital Tuesday afternoon. Photo: Amran Hossain

At 4pm, the country took a pause.

The cars and buses stopped in their path. People in their thousands streamed to the street and stood in silence. A silence that was more overpowering than the strongest of slogans. A silence stronger than the high-temper steel.

A silence that cried in the loudest of voices: We want just trial of the war criminals. We want justice for the genocide committed 42 years ago.

It was a scene, a transformation of the nation never witnessed before.

People held hands to form human chains. Passengers in buses left their seats and stood in silence. They all showed solidarity with the protestors at Shahbagh who for the last eight days are holding non-stop protests for justice for the crimes committed against humanity during Bangladesh’s 1971 Liberation War.

For three minutes from 4pm, the afternoon was no longer an afternoon. It became a history. It was an afternoon like no other afternoon.

It became emblematic of the resolute spirit of 1971 when three million people laid down their lives for the independence of Bangladesh from the clutches of Pakistan.

It was also a show of hatred for the handful few led by Jammat-e-Islami and its leaders like Ghulam Azam, Motiur Rahman Nizami, Abdul Quader Mollah, Ali Ahsan Mohamad Mojaheed , Mohammad Kamaruzzaman and others who tried to defend Pakistan and committed the heinous crimes of genocide, rapes and plundering against the Bangalis.

“All the employees of the building came down spontaneously,” said an employee of a media house.

“As word got out that some people were going down to express solidarity, everyone else wanted to do the same.”

“As we were on the top floor of the building, we couldn’t get down in time. So we all stood up on our floor,” said Tasmia Rahman, a staff of Brac.

The Bangladesh Premier League was stopped for 3 minutes as players and supporters stood up in support in Sher-e-Bangla National Stadium in Mirpur.

Parliamentarians lined up in front of Manik Miya Avenue... and the police did the same in front of Bailey Road police station.

For the first time since the Shahbagh protestors started their demonstration at the intersection eight days ago, Projommo Chottor itself was dead-still, resonating the silent appeal of the whole country for justice. They had called on the whole country to observe the silence at 4pm today.

People all over the country responded to the call of silence.

In Pabna, thousands of people stopped in front of the Pabna district unit Muktijuddha Shagshad.

Vehicles moving on the road halted also to express their solidarity.

Share on