Elliot Rodger, son of “Hunger Games” assistant director Peter Rodger, reportedly carried out a series of drive-by shootings last night near the University of California, Santa Barbara campus which left seven people, including Rodger, dead. In a deeply misogynistic video posted hours before the attack on YouTube, Rodger said he was exacting revenge for being rejected by women. “If I can’t have you, girls, I will destroy you,” he says.

Rodger was a frequent poster on PuaHate.com, an online forum known for its misogyny. “Pua” stands for pickup artist, and the site is supposedly dedicated to exposing deceptive “pickup artists,” dating gurus and so-called seduction experts who take money from men without getting them dates or sex.

As Jezebel’s Katie J.M. Baker explained in a 2012 article on PuaHate, there is some merit to criticizing sleazy and deceptive “pickup artists.” However, the men at PuaHate tend to take their frustrations out on women instead of the scammers. The result is a deeply misogynistic online forum.

Today I drove through the area near my college and saw some things that were extremely rage-inducing. I passed by this restaurant and I saw this black guy chilling with 4 hot white girls. He didn't even look good. Then later on in the day I was shopping at Trader Joe's and saw an Indian guy with 2 above average White Girls!!! What rage-inducing sights did you guys see today? Don't you just hate seeing these things when you go out? It just makes you want to quit life.

When another poster said he was being racist, Rodger responded with disbelief that white women were interested in these “undeserving” men instead of him:

I don't understand how these guys do it. Here we are suffering on PuaHate when these lesser, undeserving men that I saw today are walking around with hot girls. It doesn't make sense. In another January thread, Rodger responded to a post from an Asian male asking if a certain pair of shoes would help him attract white women. Rodger told him: Shoes won't help you get white girls. White girls are disgusted by you, silly little Asian.

The other man responded by posting what purported to be photos of himself with an attractive white woman. Rodger dismissed the photos as fake and added:

Full Asian men are disgustingly ugly and white girls would never go for you. You're just butthurt that you were born as an asian piece of shit, so you lash out by linking these fake pictures. You even admit that you wish you were half white. You'll never be half-white and you'll never fulfill your dream of marrying a white woman. I suggest you jump off a bridge.

The PuaHate website has been taken down by its operators, presumably to avoid scrutiny. A post from 1:40 AM this morning, entitled “Puahate is about to get a massive amount of press,” discussed Rodger’s posts on the site. Hatewatch is reviewing cached copies of those posts.

UPDATE: On Monday of this week, Rodger wrote in a thread at BodyBuilding.com that "It's been my life struggle to get a beautiful, white girl."