One of three roommates slain in Friday's blood-thirsty killing spree wanted to move out of the apartment shared with accused Santa Barbara killer Elliot Rodger, his devastated parents have revealed.

Gasping amid tears, Weihan (David) Wang's bereft mother confessed in an emotional interview with NBC Bay Area that since word of her only child's death, she's cried out to God, "Why doesn't he take me instead of my son?"

The 20-year-old was one of three young men slashed to death in an Isla Vista apartment, just before their sex-crazed roommate broke loose in a blood-thirsty pursuit around the University of California Santa Barbara, according to authorities.

In all seven people, including Rodger, were left dead.

Wang, pictured, was one of three young men allegedly stabbed to death by Elliot Rodger during a murder spree through Isla Vista, Calif., on Friday night. His parents said Wang didn't interact much with Rodger. (Facebook)

"I cannot believe, my son, his whole life I was so proud of him, he was a very nice guy," Jinshuang (Jane) Liu cried beside her husband Charlie Wang, who was unable to speak amid heavy sobs and tears.

Sherry Fang, a family friend, told NBC that Wang had already found another apartment and planned to move out with his friends by next semester.

That decision came amid complaints to the building's manager of Rodger playing loud music at night.

Jinshuang (Jane) Liu, Wang's mother, confessed to NBC that she has since prayed to God asking him to take her instead of her only son whom she was 'so proud' of. (NBC)

Liu said her son rarely interacted with Rodger, blaming a lack of interest between them and Rodger not being very social.

They were expecting their son home for the summer next month, with an upcoming family vacation at Yellowstone National Park to look forward to.

Instead, Roger had other plans, according to a disturbing 137-page manifesto recovered that detailed his sickening plans to violently punish others for his resented virginity at the age of 22.

Investigators talk to tenants at an apartment building where three people were killed during Friday night's mass shooting in Isla Vista. A family friend said Rodger's roommates had complained about him to their building's manager. (Jae C. Hong/AP)

At the start of his list were his plans to slaughter his roommates. When officers arrived at the apartment Friday night, they found Wang, 19-year-old George Chen and 20-year-old Cheng Yuan Hong dead at the scene.

The Santa Barbara Sheriff's Office described Chen and Hong as both listed on the apartment's lease as tenants with Rodger. They stated an investigation into Wang's relation to the apartment was ongoing.

Wang's mother, a nurse who received word of her son's death while at work, described him as an accomplished computer engineering student and basketball player who aced his SATs. She said he was well liked by everyone.

His parents are now painfully struggling to make sense of their only son's senseless death.

"I go to church a few times a week, donate, try to be nice to everybody. I don't understand why this happened to me," his mother gasped to NBC.

ngolgowski@nydailynews.com

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE VIDEO.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!