Below is a transcript of the video.

Video title: Elliot Rodger’s retribution

Length: 6:56

Scene: Sitting behind the wheel of a car.

A shot of Elliot Rodger from a video in which he promised to exact his 'retribution' on the girls and popular kids who rejected him. (YouTube)

Hi. Elliot Rodger here. Well, this is my last video. It all has to come to this. Tomorrow is the day of retribution. The day in which I will have my revenge against humanity, against all of you.

For the last eight years of my life, ever since I’ve hit puberty, I’ve been forced to endure an existence of loneliness, rejection and unfulfilled desires all because girls have never been attracted to me. Girls gave their affection and sex and love to other men, but never to me. I’m 22 years old and still a virgin. I’ve never even kissed a girl. I’ve been through college for 2½ years, more than that actually, and I’m still a virgin.

It has been very torturous. College is the time when everyone experiences those things such as sex and fun and pleasure. In those years, I’ve had to rot in loneliness.

I don’t know why you girls aren’t attracted to me, but I will punish you all for it.

It’s not fair. You girls have never been attracted to me. I don’t know why you girls aren’t attracted to me, but I will punish you all for it.

It’s an injustice, a crime, because I don’t know what you don’t see in me. I’m the perfect guy, and yet you throw yourselves at all these obnoxious men instead of me — the supreme gentleman. I will punish all of you for it (creepy laugh).

On the day of retribution, I am going to enter the hottest sorority house of UCSB and I will slaughter every single spoiled, stuck-up blond sl-t I see inside there.

Killer Elliot Rodger, who said in a video that he was 'forced to endure an existence of loneliness, rejection and unfulfilled desires' since puberty.

All those girls that I’ve desired so much. They would have all rejected me and looked down upon me as an inferior man if I ever made a sexual advance towards them, while they throw themselves at these obnoxious brutes. I’ll take great pleasure in slaughtering all of you. You will finally see that I am in truth the superior one. The true alpha man (creepy laugh). Yes.

After I’ve annihilated every single girl in the sorority house, I’ll take to the streets of Isla Vista and slay every single person I see there — all those popular kids who live such lives of hedonistic pleasure while I’ve had to rot in loneliness for all these years.

They’ve all looked down upon me every time I tried to go and join them. They’ve all treated me like a mouse. Well, now I will be a god compared to you. You will all be animals. You are animals, and I will slaughter you like animals. And I’ll be a god exacting my retribution on all those who deserve it. And you do deserve it, just for the crime of living a better life than me. All you popular kids. You’ve never accepted me, and now you’ll all pay for it.

Well, now I will be a god compared to you. You will all be animals.

And girls. All I’ve ever wanted was to love you and to be loved by you. I’ve wanted a girlfriend, I’ve wanted sex, I’ve wanted love, affection, adoration. You think I’m unworthy of it. That’s a crime that can never be forgiven. If I can’t have you, girls, I will destroy you. (creepy laugh)

You denied me a happy life, and in turn I will deny all of you life. (laughs) It’s only fair. I hate all of you. Humanity is a disgusting, wretched, depraved species. If I had it in my power I would stop at nothing to reduce every single one of you to mountains of skulls and rivers of blood, and rightfully so. You deserve to be annihilated, and I’ll give that to you. You never showed me any mercy, and so I will show you none. (laughs)

You forced me to suffer all my life, and now I’ll make you all suffer. I’ve waited a long time for this. I’ll give you exactly what you deserve, all of you. All you girls who rejected me and looked down upon me and, you know, treated me like scum while you gave yourselves to other men. And all of you men, for living a better life than me — all of you sexually active men, I hate you. I hate all of you, and I can’t wait to give you exactly what you deserve: utter annihilation. (laughs)

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE VIDEO.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!