San Rafael resident Patrick Eggert, a student at the University of California at Santa Barbara, was riding his bicycle Friday night in Isla Vista when the man authorities say is responsible for killing six people rammed Eggert with a car.

Eggert suffered only minor injuries.

A Marin Catholic High School graduate, the 19-year-old Eggert is a water polo player at the university. His father, Wayne Eggert, said his son was headed home after dinner with his roommate's water polo friend Nick Pasichuke, of the University of the Pacific, when things went awry.

"I got a text message from my son at about 9:50 p.m. merely saying 'My friend Nick and I were hit by a motorist. I'm OK, I'll call you as soon as I can,'" Wayne Eggert said.

While waiting for an ambulance for Pasichuke, whose legs were broken in the incident, Wayne Eggert said his son heard on a police radio about other people being shot by the motorist.

"He texted again and said 'Some crazy guy is shooting people out of his car,'" Eggert said.

Authorities said attacker Elliot Rodger, 22, shot, stabbed and killed six people and injured 13 others Friday night after posting an Internet video stating he would slaughter as many people as he could. He died of an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head after a shootout with deputies.

Police said the community college student was obsessed with exacting retribution for what he saw as a lifetime of social and sexual isolation. In addition to a series of YouTube videos, Rodger left behind a 137-page manifesto in which he ranted against women and couples and lamented his lack of a sex life.

Wayne Eggert said his son is in surprisingly good physical condition after his bike was destroyed by Rodger's vehicle. He has a sprained wrist, his back is sore and he was scheduled to have an MRI on his right knee Tuesday.

While both he and his son are struggling to cope with the personal impacts of Friday's tragic events, Wayne Eggert said his heart goes out to the families who are more deeply affected by Rodger's actions.

"It's so tragic for the families that lost their children and those who were more severely injured," Eggert said. "There are parents planning funerals right now."

Classes were canceled Tuesday at the university and a memorial service was held on campus. Students also created makeshift memorials with flowers and candles at the shooting scenes.

UC Board of Regents Chairman Bruce Varner, a UC Santa Barbara alumnus, said during the memorial that the UC system will do what it can to support the student community.

"We are hurt now and we will be for awhile," Varner said. "The university will unconditionally support us in our recovery and we will work together to heal."

UC President Janet Napolitano ordered flags at all 10 UC campuses lowered to half-staff through June 1 to honor the victims' memories.

"This is a time for mourning and grieving, and for consoling and supporting each other. It will take time for our UCSB colleagues to recover and heal from this," Napolitano said in a letter to the UC community Monday.

UC Berkeley will hold a candlelight vigil to remember the lives lost in Isla Vista at 8 p.m. Wednesday at Memorial Glade, which is at the center of campus.

The Associated Press contributed to this report. Follow Megan Hansen's blog at http://blogs.marinij.com/bureaucratsandbaking.