Elliot Rodger, who killed six people on Friday and ranted on YouTube about the “injustice” of women not being attracted to him, had further links to misogynistic groups. A survey of his subscribed channels reveals the 22-year-old was a Men’s Rights Activist, or MRA. This branch of the men’s liberation movement focuses on what it considers to be issues of male discrimination and oppression. He regularly posted to online forums and late last year made a call to arms against women: “Start envisioning a world where WOMEN FEAR YOU.” Rodger subscribed to several YouTube channels including RSDfreetour and The Player Supreme Show, which rails against the feminisation of men and gives tips on how to pick up women. This includes a video titled “Player Supremes New PUA Technique Guaranteed ACTION from women” which shows a naked man approaching women in a busy street.

According to the Huffington Post, Rodger was also an active member of PUAhate, an online forum aimed at exposing dodgy pick-up artists and dating gurus. The forum, which has been taken down since the shootings, was aimed at exposing failed techniques to trick women into sex. It reportedly has threads with titles such as “Are ugly women completely useless to society?” and “Have any hot women ever committed suicide?”. According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, Rodger also posted a message in January in which he expressed his outrage at white women socializing with racial minorities. “I passed by this restaurant and I saw this black guy chilling with 4 hot white girls. He didn’t even look good,” Rodger said in his post. “Then later on in the day I was shopping at Trader Joe’s and saw an Indian guy with 2 above average White Girls!!! “What rage-inducing sights did you guys see today? Don’t you just hate seeing these things when you go out? It just makes you want to quit life.”

The self-pitying members of PUAhate often describe themselves as “incels” — short for involuntary celibate. In November Rodger reacted angrily when another user suggested that lucid dreaming could be a stand-in for sex. “If all incels were to start getting sedated by lucid dreaming, incels will become docile and there will be no revolution,” he wrote. “If we can’t solve our problems we must DESTROY our problems.” He concluded with a call to arms against women: “One day incels will realize their true strength and numbers, and will overthrow this oppressive feminist system. “Start envisioning a world where WOMEN FEAR YOU.” The MRA movement has been criticised for teaching men that women are to blame for their unhappiness, that they lie, cheat, trick and manipulate. MRA also teaches that men are dominant over women and that they are entitled to women’s bodies. In Rodger’s video, posted shortly before his killing spree, he declares that he is a virgin. WARNING: The video below is extremely disturbing. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQUW3Km01BM “College is the time when everyone experiences those things such as sex and fun and pleasure. But in those years I’ve had to rot in loneliness. It’s not fair. “You girls have never been attracted to me. I don’t know why you girls aren’t attracted to me. But I will punish you all for it. “I’m going to enter the hottest sorority house of UCSB and I will slaughter every single spoiled, stuck-up, blonde s**t that I see inside there. All those girls that I’ve desired so much, they would’ve all rejected me and looked down on me as an inferior man if I ever made a sexual advance towards them. “I’ll take great pleasure in slaughtering all of you. You will finally see that I am, in truth, the superior one. The true alpha male …” Rodger’s case also has chilling similarities to another girl’s death at a Connecticut high school. The victim, Maren Sanchez, a 16-year-old student, was stabbed to death by a boy who was angry that she had rejected his invitation to the prom. This article originally appeared on News.com.au.