“They are extremely nice, very friendly, and very quiet,” said Chris Pollard, 22, a neighbor.

“They sat around and played video games,” Mr. Pollard said. “They were very nice, genuine guys. They were good kids. They went to school and studied a lot. They didn’t do anything bad.”

In a YouTube video and an online manifesto that Mr. Rodger published before the spasm of violence, he spoke of taking revenge on blonde sorority girls, and the “brutes” whose company they preferred to his own. While he wrote at length of clashes with past roommates, he did not seem to have as many conflicts with Mr. Hong and Mr. Chen. But he wrote that he would have to kill his housemates “to secure the entire apartment for myself,” adding that he would knock them out with a hammer before slitting their throats.

The sheriff’s department did not release any more details about the three young men’s deaths, but on Saturday deputies removed bags of evidence from the apartment, including one bag labeled “2 machetes, 1 knife, 1 hammer.”

Mr. Hong, who went by James, was a computer engineering major and listed Taipei as his hometown on his Facebook profile. He attended Lynbrook High School in San Jose and volunteered at Rainbow Chinese School in Cupertino. Mr. Chen was from Ottawa, Ontario, and attended Leland High School in San Jose, according to his Facebook profile.

Outside the IV Deli Mart, where Mr. Michaels-Martinez was shot, a large memorial popped up, with photographs, flowers and candles offered as a tribute.

Mr. Michaels-Martinez graduated from San Luis Obispo High School in 2012. He was a good student who worked on the school newspaper and played on the junior varsity basketball team, the school’s principal, Leslie O’Connor, said on Sunday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His father, Richard Martinez, said his son had a grade-point average of nearly 4.0 in college, and had volunteered at a school cleanup earlier that day. He told his father less than an hour before the shooting how much he enjoyed helping out.

“He was really loved by a lot of people,” he said. “Things were going very, very well for him in school.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Michaels-Martinez was finishing his sophomore year and planned to study abroad next year. He wanted to go to law school eventually, Mr. O’Connor said.

Sam Hassan, 60, whose family owns the IV Deli Mart, said Mr. Michaels-Martinez was part of a group of six people who came into the shop on Friday night. He was the last to enter, and, as he was stepping inside, he was shot from behind in the hip. He turned, and was then shot in the chest, falling into the store.

Another trove of flowers lay on the lawn outside the Alpha Phi sorority house, where Mr. Rodger banged on the door, before shooting at passers-by. The shots fatally struck Ms. Weiss and Ms. Cooper, both members of another sorority, Delta Delta Delta.

Photo

Ms. Weiss was described as a dedicated and kind student who had been excited about attending the University of California, Santa Barbara.

“She was a California girl through and through,” said Christine Galvin, the booster president for her high school’s aquatics program. “When you grow up here, it’s an amazing school, and it’s far enough from home, but still close to home. It’s also difficult to get into. She was really thrilled.”

Ms. Galvin said Ms. Weiss was a member of the Westlake High School girls’ water polo team for four years and served as a team captain and was on the school’s swim team for three years. “She was very sweet and friendly to all the girls on the team — very committed, a good team player,” Ms. Galvin said on Sunday. The high school was planning to hold a vigil for her on the pool deck on Monday.

Ms. Cooper, Ms. Weiss’s sorority sister, was an art history major whom friends and neighbors described as a bright and lively presence, eager to include everyone in whatever she was doing, whether it was a trip to the beach or the ballroom dancing classes that she helped teach.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“She was always very happy, very inclusive — that’s just the kind of person she was,” said Faris Barud, 20, one of Ms. Cooper’s neighbors in Isla Vista and also a student in the ballroom dancing class. “She was always the type of person to stop by and ask what we were doing.”

Derek Saich, another neighbor, said Ms. Cooper had just headed out for the night with other members of her sorority when the shots rang out. A few minutes earlier, he had passed her on the street. He said he could not shake the feeling that maybe he could have saved her, if only he had stopped to talk for a minute.

“We’re all still in shock,” Mr. Saich said. “I can’t believe she’s gone.”