ISLA VISTA, California — The student who murdered six in a quiet California university town is believed to have used a machete and hammer to kill his first three victims in an apartment he planned to turn into a “personal torture and killing chamber.”

[np_storybar title=”Matt Gurney: The Santa Barbara shooting was the definition of preventable, so why did six people die?” link=”http://fullcomment.nationalpost.com/2014/05/26/matt-gurney-santa-barbara-shooting-was-definition-of-preventable-six-people-died-anyway/”%5D

The most depressing part of last weekend’s mass shooting in Santa Barbara, California, other than the six dead and 13 wounded, of course, is the bigger implication. After every shooting incident like this one, we are quick to demand answers as to how this has happened, and suggest how things could have gone better. But this latest rampage was the textbook example of a shooting that was completely preventable. Everything was in place here to stop it. Everyone had done the right thing. And six people died, anyway. This may be the time in the collective conversation where we acknowledge that there’s sometimes no real defence against such evil acts.

Continue reading…

[/np_storybar]

One of them, Cheng Yuan Hong, 20, an engineering student from Taiwan, was a roommate Elliot Rodger had accused of stealing three candles worth US$22.

At the time, Mr. Rodger, 22, attempted a citizen’s arrest and called police, but Mr. Hong was released. Friends said he was planning to move at the end of term because Mr. Rodger was “strange.”

Two machetes, a hammer and a knife were among the items removed from the first-floor corner apartment they shared at the Capri complex in Isla Vista.

A day before the massacre, Mr. Rodger compiled a 141-page manifesto, in which described how he intended to knock out his roommates, then slit their throats “to secure the entire apartment for myself as my personal torture and killing chamber.” He used more than US$5,000 obtained from his parents and grandmothers to buy at least three semi-automatic handguns and more than 400 rounds of ammunition. Then he wrote, “Who’s the alpha male now?”

A neighbour at the Capri said Mr. Rodger had been taken to hospital after a fight in July. “He was so emotional. I’ve never seen anybody that mad,” the man said. “He said, ‘I’m going to kill all of them. I’m going to kill myself.’”

He described taking the young man to a party, but he was “like a ghost” and “just stared at people.”

Minutes before opening fire in downtown Isla Vista, Mr. Rodger emailed his manifesto to 30 people, including his parents and therapists. He is thought to have already killed his three roommates — Mr. Hong, and fellow overseas students, George Chen, 19, and Weihan Wang, 20.

One of the therapists immediately called Mr. Rodger’s mother, about 13 minutes before the massacre began.

Chin Rodger called her husband, Peter Rodger, assistant director of the Hunger Games films, from whom she is divorced. They began driving from Los Angeles to Isla Vista in separate cars. Both heard details of the massacre on their car radios.

By then, their son had shot Katie Cooper, 20 and Veronika Weiss, 19, outside a sorority house and Christopher Martinez, 20, in a nearby deli.

All were fellow student at the University of California, Santa Barbara.

He then drove around in his black BMW, firing wildly before killing himself.

Simon Astaire, a family friend, said Mr. Rodger had been seeing therapists since age eight, including virtually “every day” while at high school. “What more could [his parents] have done?,” he asked. “They are going through indescribable grief dealing with the loss of their son. His parents were conscious and concerned about their son’s health. They thought he was in good hands.”

Other friends of Peter Rodger said he was “heartbroken” and “did everything he could,” including engaging top specialists, but his son turned his back on therapy as an adult and refused to take medication.

Jenni Rodger, the young man’s aunt, said, “He was always a disturbed child. I don’t know how he was allowed to get a gun. Something has to be done about gun laws in America. Pete is absolutely broken. I can’t see how he’ll ever recover.”

The Daily Telegraph