Only weeks earlier, in late April, deputies from the Santa Barbara County Sheriff’s Office had stopped by Mr. Rodger’s apartment at the request of state mental health officials, acting on an expression of concern by his mother. They left after a calm and polite Mr. Rodger assured them that there was nothing to worry about. The officers reported that Mr. Rodger was shy and had told them that he was having difficulties in his social life.

Photo

That gave them little ground on which to act, under California law. Because Mr. Rodger was never institutionalized because of his emotional problems, he was able to legally purchase the weaponry he used in the shooting.

Sometime after the police visit, Mr. Rodger — who had already amassed a stockpile of weapons and ammunition in the apartment — added a note to his manifesto: “If they had demanded to search my room that would have ended everything. For a few horrible seconds I thought it was all over.”

His killing rampage was meticulously laid out, moving from an angry fantasy to a detailed mission over the course of his three years there. Mr. Rodger visited a shooting range for target practice in Oxnard, Calif.; bought three semiautomatic handguns (in case two of them jammed) at different gun stores; and scheduled and postponed the day of reckoning for the most logistical of reasons. At one point, he wanted to do it on Halloween 2013 but pulled back after determining that the police were out in extra force on that night.

“May 24th, 2014 was the final date,” he wrote. “There is no postponing it anymore, no backing out. If I don’t do this, then I only have a future filled with more loneliness and rejection ahead of me, devoid of sex, love, and enjoyment.”

The sheriff’s office identified the three remaining victims on Sunday evening, all students at the University of California, Santa Barbara. The first two were Mr. Rodger’s roommates, Cheng Yuan Hong, 20, and George Chen, 19, both of San Jose, Calif. The third was Weihan Wang, 20, of Fremont, Calif. Two women killed in front of a sorority during Mr. Rodger’s subsequent shooting spree were Katherine Breann Cooper, 22, of Chino Hills, Calif., and Veronika Elizabeth Weiss, 19, of Westlake Village, Calif. The sixth fatal attack was against Christopher Ross Michaels-Martinez, 20, of Los Osos, Calif.

Simon Astaire, who described himself as a longtime friend of Mr. Rodger’s parents, who are divorced, said the parents were devastated. ”It’s like everyone’s unbearable nightmare,” he said Sunday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He said Mr. Rodger’s mother, Li Chin, opened the email from her son at 9:17 p.m. Friday, about 10 minutes before the shooting started, after getting an alarmed call from Mr. Rodger’s therapist. Mr. Astaire said she read the first four lines and went to Mr. Rodger’s YouTube page, where she found a video pledging retribution that had been posted the day before.

Photo

Mr. Astaire said she called Peter Rodger, her ex-husband — who was at dinner with his new wife and two friends in Los Angeles — and then called 911. The two parents both began racing to Isla Vista, which is about 13 miles from downtown Santa Barbara, arriving to learn of the killing spree, Mr. Astaire said.

By many accounts, Elliot Rodger had a long history of unusual behavior. Chris Pollard, 22, a neighbor in the Isla Vista apartment building, said he had been rebuffed as he tried to encourage Mr. Rodger to socialize with other residents in the building.

“He just sat and was nonresponsive,” Mr. Pollard said. “Any time anybody tried to get him involved, he just seemed like he didn’t want to be involved. He looked like he became gradually more frustrated or bored, and then eventually he would just get up and go inside.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

He recounted seeing Mr. Rodger come home, bloodied and beaten, after an encounter at a bar. Mr. Rodger, in his manifesto, said he had begun trying to push women over a ledge at the bar, sparking the fight that led to several men beating him up.

Mr. Pollard said it had taken hours to calm Mr. Rodger, as he fumed about the men who had attacked him. “He started saying: ‘I’m going to kill them. I’m going to kill them. I’m going to kill myself,’ ” he said.

On Friday afternoon, before the violence began, Mr. Rodger approached Giovanni’s Pizza, up the street from his apartment. Ally Kubie, 20, who was working behind the counter, said he had stood on the patio, barely moving as he stared at her through the glass, a smile fixed on his face.

“I asked, ‘Do you need help?’ ” Ms. Kubie said. “But he just stared at me. It was creepy.”

Sheriff Bill Brown of Santa Barbara County, speaking Sunday on “Face the Nation” on CBS, recounted how deputies had visited Mr. Rodger in April and found that he appeared calm and lucid and did not meet the criteria, in the view of his deputies, by which he might have been taken in for observation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Because of that, they also had no grounds for searching Mr. Rodger’s apartment, where he had already stockpiled his weapons and ammunition, including a Glock 34 and a Sig Sauer P226.

“And obviously, looking back on this, it’s a very tragic situation, and we certainly, you know, wish that we could turn the clock back and maybe change some things,” he said.

Mr. Rodger related the same anecdote with relief, saying he thought his plan was about to be foiled when he found seven deputies at his door. “As soon as I saw those cops, the biggest fear I had ever felt in my life overcame me,” he wrote. “I had the striking and devastating fear that someone had somehow discovered what I was planning to do, and reported me for it.

“If that was the case, the police would have searched my room, found all of my guns and weapons, along with my writings about what I plan to do with them,” he wrote. “I would have been thrown in jail, denied of the chance to exact revenge on my enemies. I can’t imagine a hell darker than that.”

The plan that he carried out on Friday indeed was close to what he had written about. “The first people I would have to kill are my two housemates, to secure the entire apartment for myself as my personal torture and killing chamber,” he wrote. Police said they believed the third person he stabbed there was a visitor.

He said his next phase would be head to the Alpha Phi sorority, to kill women there. Once he arrived there, he pounded on the door but was denied entrance; he shot three women outside, two fatally. From there, he said, he planned to drive the streets “splattering as many enemies as I can with my SUV” and shooting at passers-by.