CLOSE The father of one of Elliott Rodger's shooting victims in Santa Barbara, California, lashes out at political inaction after the Sandy Hook Elementary tragedy, which he says is partly to blame in this latest shooting. VPC

Jose Cardoso pays his respects at a makeshift memorial in front of the IV Deli Mart, where part of Friday night's mass shooting took place by a drive-by shooter, on May 25, 2014, in the Isla Vista area near Goleta, Calif. (Photo: Chris Carlson, AP)

The six victims of a murderous rampage in Santa Barbara will be remembered Tuesday in a "day of mourning and reflection'' by the university where they studied and prepared for their future.

In a letter to the school community, Henry Yang, chancellor of the University of California-Santa Barbara, and interim executive vice chancellor Joel Michaelsen said a memorial service will be held at Harder Stadium at 4 p.m. PT Tuesday.

"This is a period of mourning for all of us,'' Yang and Michaelsen wrote. "The moving candlelight vigil that our students organized on Saturday evening began the process of healing. On Tuesday we will remember and honor the victims of this horrible event and come together as an academic community to reflect, talk with each other and think about the future.''

Cheng Yuan Hong, 20; George Chen, 19; and Weihan Wang, 20 were stabbed to death in the apartment they shared with Elliot Rodger, 22.

After those attacks Friday night, authorities say, Rodger went on a shooting spree starting at the Alpha Phi sorority house, where Veronika Elizabeth Weiss, 19; and Katherine Breann Cooper, 22, were killed.

Rodger then headed to the IV Deli Mart in nearby Isla Vista, where he killed Christopher Ross Michaels-Martinez, 20, a UC-Santa Barbara student majoring in English who planned to go to law school after graduating.

Rodger was later found dead, apparently of a self-inflicted gunshot wound.

The university and surrounding community on Monday wrestled with grief and regret about the lost promise of the young people who were killed.

Michaels-Martinez was a dorm residential adviser at UC-Santa Barbara last year and remembered by those who knew him as warm and welcoming. He had intended to follow the career path charted by his parents, who are both lawyers, the Los Angeles Times reported.

An only child, Michaels-Martinez wanted to go on to law school and also planned to study in London. He had traveled extensively in Europe with his father and high school friends, according to the Times. Growing up, he played soccer, football and basketball.

Cooper and Weiss were both members of the Delta Delta Delta sorority. The group's president, Phyllis Durbin Grissom, said in a written message that "Katie will be remembered for her generous spirit and warm heart. Veronika will be remembered for her vibrant personality and enthusiasm for life.''

Cooper, from Chino Hills, Calif., was a painter and on the verge of graduating with a degree in art history. Weiss was in her first year at UC-Santa Barbara. Originally from Westlake Village, she was part of her high school water polo team, the Thousand Oaks Acorn reported.

Water polo wasn't Weiss' only sport in high school. She also ran cross country, swam and played baseball, the Los Angeles Times reported. Weiss was also a top student, leaving high school with a 4.3 grade-point average, and had a talent for math, her father, Bob Weiss, told the newspaper.

"She will be an inspiration to me every day of my life," he told the Times. "There was never a day I wasn't proud of her. Never a single day.''

Hong, who was majoring in computer science according to the Times, and Chen were both from San Jose. They had been Rodger's roommates, their names on the apartment's lease along with his. Wang was from Fremont, Calif. It was unclear whether he had been living with the three other men or was just visiting.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1h5SlMH