For Charles Sophy, a celebrity Beverly Hills psychiatrist and television regular, clients from the show-business world are a staple of his business.

Paris Hilton, the party-loving hotel heiress, turned to him for advice when she was in trouble with the law, former Spice Girl Mel B praised his work in interviews and he dispensed on-air expertise on shows such as Celebrity Rehab and Flipping Out.

So it was not unusual when Peter Rodger, a British film-maker now based in Hollywood, asked him in late 2012 to meet his 21-year-old son, Elliot, an awkward loner who seemed painfully shy, particularly when it came to the opposite sex.

Mr Sophy was just one in a long line of psychiatrists, psychologists and counsellors who had seen the younger Rodger since his parents first sought help for him when he was nine. He made no more progress than the others.

For what neither his family, nor all the mental health professionals, nor the police called to check on him just a few weeks ago, identified was that Elliot Rodger was not simply a deeply introverted young man.

Rather, he was a violently disturbed individual, harbouring a seething, murderous hatred against the blonde students he believed were spurning him, against women in particular and society around him in general.

Elliot Rodger (SUPPLIED)

Even before he was taken to see Mr Sophy, he was planning what he called “the day of retribution”, as he revealed in a 137-page manifesto about his life that he entitled “My Twisted World”.

A series of videos uploaded to YouTube - with a tone mixing of swaggering and self-pitying - contained similar sickening messages.

Last weekend, Rodger carried out the killing spree he so envisaged. He first hacked to death his two male room-mates, and a friend who had the misfortune to be visiting them, at his student apartment in Isla Vista, near Santa Barbara on the Californian coast.

He then went on a rolling drive-by shooting rampage from his black BMW, killing two female students outside a sorority house, and another male student in a grocery store. And he finally took his own life with a blast to the head after he was injured in two shoot-outs with police.

A wrecked black BMW sedan on the street following Rodger's drive-by shootings (REUTERS)

Rodger had stopped seeing Mr Sophy last year after the doctor prescribed him, according to his screed, with an anti-psychotic medication used to treat schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. “I refused to take it,” he wrote, “and I never saw Dr Sophy again after that.”

But the psychiatrist was not the only Hollywood connection who was asked for help by Peter Rodger, an assistant director on The Hunger Games and son of George Rodger, a war photographer and founder of the Magnum picture agency.

He also turned to his friend Dale Launer, writer and director of several films about relationships, to try to teach his son some tips with women, according to the manifesto.

Mr Launer may have enjoyed on-screen success with such sensitive plots as “Blind Date”, “Love Potion 9” and “Ruthless People”, but there was no breakthrough with Elliot Rodger.

“He wanted to help me overcome my troubles because he is a so-called expert with women,” the killer noted in his manifesto, written it should be notes by a crazed individual about to embark on a lethal rampage.

“In truth, there is nothing men like Dale can really do to help me attract girls and lose my virginity. They can’t mind-control girls to be attracted to me.”

Dale Launer

Mr Sophy and Mr Launer did not return requests for comment. Several others named in his manifesto, including a handful of young women who he claimed “crushed” him by spurning him and his few former male schoolboy friends have spoken only to dispute his interpretation of their closeness.

In contrast to Rodger’s inability to strike a chord with living individuals, he revelled in his acquisition of inanimate objects and the luxuries of a life of private schools in Sussex and then Los Angeles.

“We travelled on Virgin Atlantic Upper Class,” he noted on one occasion, with typical swagger. “I was extremely enthusiastic about this, as I always loved luxury and opulence.” His social media pages were packed with images of him with the $40,000 black BMW 328i coupe that his mother had bought for him.

In another video, he gushed: “These sunglasses here are $300, Giorgio Armani,” then adding: “See? Look at how fabulous I look.” But there was not just the nauseating self-preening as he filed himself roaming Santa Barbara, bemoaning his lonely existence as all around him were, in his eyes, enveloped in young love “Look at them,” Rodger said to his camera phone, staring at a couple on a picnic bench at the beach. “He’s in heaven right now, sitting on this beautiful beach, kissing her, feeling her love, while I’m sitting here alone, ’cause no beautiful girl wants to be my girlfriend.”

But what might have sounded like the youthful angst of a young man lamenting that he was still a virgin morphed into uncontrollable rage.

Ridger posted screengrabs of him with his father and step mother at the Hunger Games premiere on his Facebook page

“I don’t know why you girls haven’t been attracted to me, but I will punish you, for it is an injustice,” he said. “I’ll take great pleasure in slaughtering all of you. You will finally see that I am the superior one, the true alpha male.”

In many mass murders, the investigators have struggled for clues to identify the motives for the killer’s actions. But Rodger’s sickening rationale was all too clearly bequeathed in his oluminous Internet footprint.

There were of course the videos uploaded to YouTube and the manifesto - part David Copperfield, part Catcher in the Rye, part American Psycho. Just minutes before embarking on his rampage, he emailed the document to up to 30 recipients, including a therapist, his family and Internet acquaintances.

But he was also a regular contributor on Internet sites for male so-called “incels” (involuntary celibates). Most notably, on PUAhate (chanelling hatred of successful PUAs or “pick-up artists”), he wrote in his sprawling manifesto that he had discovered “a forum full of men who are starved of sex, just like me”.

What he read, he continued, “confirmed many of the theories I had about how wicked and degenerate women really are”.

The atrocity has once again confronted America with the tragic consequences of mental health and access to guns. And it is raising fresh doubts about missed clues.

Police officers who visited Elliot Rodger just weeks before he went on the rampage knew of earlier disturbing videos that he posted online, but did not check them.

The guns he used in the killings last Friday were stashed inside his apartment at the time, but police never searched the residence or conducted a check to determine if he owned firearms because they did not consider him a threat.

Rodger convinced them, with his now familiar persuasiveness, that he was not a threat. The reality was very different.

Chris Rugg, a former room-mate said that he he had a “bad feeling” while living with Rodger and expressed regret that he did not take the “opportunity to help”.

“I felt that this was someone who needed help and he had put himself in a position where he couldn’t help himself and that puts it on the community to help those who can’t help each other,” “I had my opportunity living him when I knew things were up that I could have called in and it was my opportunity to help and I didn’t.”

For Bianca de Kock, there are just the memories of the smile. The University of California student was walking home with two friends when a black BMW came out of nowhere, the car window down.

The man inside Elliot Rodger had a “smirky, grimacy smile” across his face, Ms de Kock said. “He wanted to do this,” she told ABC News.

“He looked happy about it.” After smiling, he opened fire. Ms de Kock survived the five bullet wounds. Both her friends died.