The suspect who killed six people and injured 13 others near the University of California, Santa Barbara Friday night was identified as a 22-year-old mentally disturbed man, Elliot Rodger, who videotaped his desire to "slaughter" women for rejecting him. A church in the area has offered assistance to anyone who needs prayers or counselling.

Santa Barbara County Sheriff Bill Brown told reporters Saturday evening that the suspect was wounded by officers before he seemingly "took his own life."

Rodger, whose father was the assistant director for one of the "Hunger Games" films, apparently stabbed three males to death within his residence before going on a shooting spree, Brown said. The suspect killed two female students and a male student, identified as Christopher Michael-Martinez.

At least 13 others were injured – eight of them with gunshot wounds, four were hit by Rodger's car and one received a minor injury, according to CNN.

The shootings took place in nine locations in the town of Isla Vista near the UCSB campus at about 9.30 p.m. local time Friday. The suspect, who was driving a black BMW, fired gunshots at people and other targets, witnesses said. The gunman also reportedly exchanged fire with the sheriff's deputies and then crashed into a parked car. He was found dead from a gunshot wound.

Police recovered over 400 remaining rounds of ammunition from the suspect's vehicle. "All were legally purchased from federally licensed dealers and all were registered to the suspect," Brown said.

A member of Rodger's family had earlier reported his behavior and videos to police, the sheriff said.

Police interviewed Rodger but found him to be "polite and kind," family lawyer Alan Schifman told ABC News. The lawyer also said the suspect was being treated by multiple therapists and was a student at Santa Barbara City College.

"There was an incident probably a year and a half ago where he was...he fell from a balcony at a party or was thrown off of it," Schifman added. "I think he was probably a victim from my understanding of bullying throughout his life... I'm sure that had played a role in the terrible consequences from last night."

Dylan Fontillas, a witness, was quoted as saying that he looked the suspect straight in the eyes during the shooting. "He almost kind of had a smirk like he was excited about it or he was happy about it. It's pretty scary. It's pretty disturbing."

Jason Lomelino, pastor of Isla Vista Church, says his congregation is ready to assist anyone in need of prayer in the aftermath of the shootings. "Isla Vista Church expresses its deep sorrow over the events that occurred last night," Lomelino told Noozhawk.com. "This is our city, and we are heartbroken by the tragedy that took place on our streets. We are there to minister to them in whatever way they need."

Church members were available over the weekend to pray for or talk to students on the campus. "We offer a safe place to come and talk, and we offer that now more than ever to anybody in need," Lomelino said.

In the video that Rodger posted on YouTube before the shooting, he says: "Tomorrow is the day of retribution, the day in which I will have my revenge against humanity, against all of you. For the last eight years of my life, ever since I hit puberty, I've been forced to endure an existence of loneliness, rejection and unfulfilled desires all because girls have never been attracted to me. Girls gave their affection, and sex and love to other men but never to me."

He adds: "I'm 22 years old and I'm still a virgin. I've never even kissed a girl. I've been through college for two and a half years, more than that actually, and I'm still a virgin. It has been very torturous. College is the time when everyone experiences those things such as sex and fun and pleasure. Within those years, I've had to rot in loneliness. It's not fair.

"…I will punish all of you for it. On the day of retribution I'm going to enter the hottest sorority house of UCSB. And I will slaughter every spoiled, stuck-up, blond slut I see inside there. All those girls I've desired so much, they would have all rejected me and looked down upon me as an inferior man if I ever made a sexual advance towards them while they throw themselves at these obnoxious brutes. I'll take great pleasure in slaughtering all of you."

The suspect also says, "Well now I will be a god compared to you. You will all be animals. You are animals and I will slaughter you like animals. And I will be a god. Exacting my retribution on all those who deserve it," according to the transcript of the video provided by CNN.

The UCSB issued a statement Saturday, saying, "Our campus community is shocked and saddened by the events that occurred last night in the nearby community of Isla Vista. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families who are grieving and mourning as a result of this tragedy."