A friend of the gunman who killed six people in a furious rampage near the University of California, Santa Barbara, described him as a "really lonely guy" who was often depressing to be around.

Andi Chan said he and Elliot Rodger, 22, were friends for two and a half years.

"Me and my friends tried to help him," said Chan. "He doesn't like to talk or hang out."

Read: Father of Santa Barbara Victim Sobs and Rails Against Son’s Death

Read: Elliot Rodger’s Trail of Carnage

Police identified Elliot Rodger as the shooter, a man who videotaped his rage over his rejection by women and vowed "retribution" just hours before the killing began. He was also identified as the killer by a lawyer for his father Peter Rodger, who was the assistant director for one of the “Hunger Games” films.

Chan said Rodger often talked about finding a girlfriend, something he echoed in videos posted to YouTube and a 141-page manifesto that Santa Barbara County Sheriff Bill Brown called "rambling."

In a YouTube video titled "Elliot Rodger's Retribution," Rodger sat in the driver's seat of a car as he promised "retribution" and discussed his "loneliness, rejection and unfulfilled desires."

"Girls gave their affection and sex and love to other men but never to me," he said in the video, which he added would be his last.

Read: Santa Barbara Shooter Was Angry Girls Were ‘Repulsed by Me’

"He asked why the world is unfair to him. 'I'm a good looking guy. Why do girls like ugly, fat guys?'" said Chan. "I told him appearance wasn't everything."

Chan said after they saw the 2012 film "Chronicle," Rodger said he wanted to "dominate the world." In the film, three high school students gain superpowers and one character - who's bullied, shy and lonely - eventually uses them in a robbery and in an attempt to kill his father. He dies at the end of the film, killed by one of the other students.

"We all thought he was insane but we were used to it," said Chan. "Maybe in his mind he really wanted to do that."

Chan said he realized Rodger was involved in the shooting when he saw a photo of his BMW.

"I started to search for the shooter's name, then I saw stuff on Facebook," he said. "I was shocked and disappointed. No matter how angry you get, you are - you can't kill people."

Rodger's Murderous Spree

Rodger's began the spree by stabbing to death three people in his home Friday, police said. He then drove around the Isla Vista neighborhood, killing three others and injuring 13 more.

The murderous spree ended when he crashed his car with a bicyclist he had struck on his car windshield. He was found with a gunshot to his head.

"It would appear he took his own life," said Brown.

Read: Elliot Rodger’s Trail of Carnage

Police said three guns were recovered from Rodger's car. Police said he had more than 400 rounds of ammunition.

"All were legally purchased from federally licensed dealers and all were registered to the suspect," said Brown.

Families, Sorority Mourn Victims of Santa Barbara Killings

Police identified three of the victims - 22-year-old Katherine Breann, 19-year-old Veronika Weiss and 20-year-old Christopher Michaels-Martinez. The other three victims haven't been identified.

Four of the injured were treated and released from Goleta Valley Cottage Hospital, according to Dr. Stephen Kaminski, the director of trauma services at the hospital.

Six others remain at Santa Barbara Cottage Hospital, where one is in good condition, three are in fair condition and two are in serious condition, said Kaminski. A seventh victim was released.

Two of the victims were members of the sorority Delta Delta Delta, which issued a statement Saturday saying: "Tri Delta is devastated to learn of the tragic event at the University of California, Santa Barbara and so very saddened to learn of the death of two of our members. Our hearts go out to their families and our sisters at Gamma Theta. Tri Delta's staff, volunteers and local alumnae are working with the chapter to provide support as they grieve this loss."

The University of California, Santa Barbara, also issued a statement, saying in part: "Our campus community is shocked and saddened by the events that occurred last night in the nearby community of Isla Vista. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families who are grieving and mourning as a result of this tragedy."

Story Continues