It was his “War on Women.”

In the repulsive manifesto he penned before killing six people and himself in seaside Southern California, tortured Santa Barbara college student Elliot Rodger vowed to “punish all females for the crime of depriving me of sex.”

“They have starved me of sex for my entire youth, and gave that pleasure to other men,” the sex-obsessed 22-year-old virgin wrote in his 137-page screed, titled “My Twisted World.”

“I cannot kill every single female on earth, but I can deliver a devastating blow that will shake all of them to the core of their wicked hearts.”

“Females truly have something mentally wrong with them,” Rodger wrote in the rambling diatribe, which he emailed to two dozen people ahead of his bloody Friday night rampage.

Elliot Rodger's twisted world. (New York Daily News)

He also writes at one point about putting women in “concentration camps.”

There were three distinct phases to Rodger’s sick scheme:

“On the day before the Day of Retribution, I will start the First Phase of my vengeance: Silently killing as many people as I can around Isla Vista by luring them into my apartment through some form of trickery,” Rodger chillingly wrote.

“The first people I would have to kill are my two housemates, to secure the entire apartment for myself as my personal torture and killing chamber. After that, I will start luring people into my apartment, knock them out with a hammer, and slit their throats. I will torture some of the good looking people before I kill them, assuming that the good looking ones had the best sex lives.”

Three male students — Cheng Yuan Hong, George Chen and Weihan Wang — were indeed found dead in Rodger’s apartment with multiple horrific stab wounds.

Excerpts from the revolting manifesto. (New York Daily News)

“The Second Phase will take place on the Day of Retribution itself, just before the climactic massacre. . . . My War on Women,” the depraved Rodger wrote.

“I will attack the very girls who represent everything I hate in the female gender: The hottest sorority of UCSB.”

No one answered Rodger’s knocks at the door of his target sorority, Alpha Phi, so he turned his wrath on two young women across the street, Delta Delta Delta sorority sisters Katie Cooper and Veronika Weiss.

Rodger then moved on to his scheme’s “Final Phase,” which included shooting up a deli and led to the death of University of California at Santa Barbara student Christopher Michael-Martinez.

Rodger never got to the “Final Phase,” or “my ultimate showdown in the streets of Isla Vista.”

Cheng Yuan Hong, 20, was allegedly stabbed to death by Elliot Rodger. (Facebook) George Chen, 19, was found stabbed to death at Elliot Rodger's home. (Facebook)

“On the morning before, I will drive down to my father’s house to kill my little brother, denying him of the chance to grow up to surpass me, along with my stepmother Soumaya, as she will be in the way,” the depressed loner wrote in his manifesto.

“I will then make my way to Del Playa, splattering as many of my enemies as I can with the SUV, and shooting anyone I don’t splatter. I can only imagine how sweet it will be to ram the SUV into all of those groups of popular young people who I’ve always witnessed walking right in the middle of the road as if they are better than everyone else. When they are writhing in pain, their bodies broken and dying after I splatter them, they will fully realize their crimes.”

In his screed, the Santa Barbara City College student justified his deeds, describing life as “such a cruel joke” and writing, “sex . . . the very word fills me with hate.”

“Once I hit puberty, I would . . . always hunger for it, I would always covet it, I would always fantasize about it. But I would never get it,” Rodger wrote. “Not getting any sex is what will shape the very foundation of my miserable youth. This was a very dark day.”

A passerby walks past a makeshift memorial at the Alpha Phi sorority house on Sunday. Two women were killed here as part of Friday night's mass shooting. (Chris Carlson/AP) A passerby pays his respects at a makeshift memorial in front of the IV Deli Mart on Sunday. This is the scene of Friday's drive-by shooting that was part of Elliot Rodger's vindictive scheme against women. (Chris Carlson/AP) Two students look at a sign that reads 'We are Gauchos We are Strong We will Remember' set up outside an apartment in the college town of Isla Vista, Calif. on Sunday. (MICHAEL NELSON/EPA) A flower rests near pieces of a broken window from the IV Deli Mart. (Chris Carlson/AP)

Rodger also recalls once saving his brother’s life from drowning, but the mass murderer returns again and again to his burning sexual frustration.

“One day I found some posts on the Internet about teenagers having sex, and I was once again reminded of the life I had been denied,” the furious Rodger wrote. “I developed extreme feelings of envy, hatred, and anger towards anyone who has a sex life. . . . This was when I formed my ideas that sex should be outlawed. It is the only way to make the world a fair and just place. If I can’t have it, I will destroy it. That’s the conclusion I came to, right then and there.”

Before resorting to violence, Rodger tried to attract women with wealth. He drove fancy cars. Yet he remained a loner.

“The final solution to triumph over my enemies was to destroy them, to carry out my Day of Retribution, to exact my ultimate and devastating vengeance against all of the popular young people who never accepted me, and against all women for rejecting me and starving me of love and sex,” he wrote.

“I had nothing to live for now. I was going to be a virgin outcast forever. I realized that I had to start planning and preparing for the Day of Retribution,” the killer added.

“I didn’t start this war. I wasn’t the one who struck first. . . . But I will finish it by striking back. I will punish everyone. And it will be beautiful. Finally, at long last, I can show the world my true worth.”

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO READ THE MANIFESTO.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!