Authorities searching for answers in the killing spree in Isla Vista, California , have been looking into a video posted on social media that contains a man's tirade against women who rebuffed him, according to police.

In the chilling YouTube video, titled "Retribution," 22-year-old Elliot Rodger rants for nearly seven minutes against women he says ignored and rejected him.

Below is a transcript of the disturbing video, prepared by CNN.

Hi. Elliot Rodger here.

Well, this is my last video, it has all had to come to this. Tomorrow is the day of retribution, the day in which I will have my revenge against humanity, against all of you. For the last eight years of my life, ever since I hit puberty, I've been forced to endure an existence of loneliness, rejection and unfulfilled desires all because girls have never been attracted to me. Girls gave their affection, and sex and love to other men but never to me.

Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Jose Cardoso pays his respects Sunday, May 25, at a makeshift memorial at the IV Deli Mart, where part of a mass shooting took place, in Isla Vista, California. Elliot Rodger, 22, went on a rampage Friday night, May 23, near the University of California, Santa Barbara, stabbing three people to death at his apartment before shooting and killing three more in a nearby neighborhood, sheriff's officials said. Rodger also injured 13 others and died of an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound, authorities said.

Hide Caption 1 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – A man places flowers on the lawn of the Alpha Phi sorority house in Isla Vista on May 25. Two young women -- Katherine Cooper, 22, and Veronika Weiss, 19, -- were fatally shot outside the house Friday night. Hide Caption 2 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Students gather for a candlelight vigil at the University of California, Santa Barbara, on Saturday, May 24. Hide Caption 3 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Two students comfort each other during the candlelight vigil to honor the victims of Friday night's mass shooting in Isla Vista. Hide Caption 4 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – People gather at a park in Isla Vista for the May 24 vigil. Hide Caption 5 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – IV Deli Mart owner Michael Hassan, second from left, cleans up his store with employees May 24 as onlookers gather outside one of the shooting scenes. Student Christopher Martinez, 20, was getting a sandwich at the deli when he was fatally shot. Hide Caption 6 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – University of Santa Barbara, California, student Derrick Hayes gets emotional outside the IV Deli Mart on May 24 in Isla Vista. Hide Caption 7 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – A police officer inspects the gunman's car on May 24 after the killing spree in Isla Vista. The suspect, described as mentally disturbed and possibly bent on retribution, sprayed bullets from his car in a rampage called "premeditated mass murder," Santa Barbara County sheriff's deputies said. Hide Caption 8 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – A Santa Barbara County deputy sheriff walks along the street May 24 near a shooting scene in Isla Vista. Hide Caption 9 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Santa Barbara County Sheriff Bill Brown speaks at a press conference regarding murder suspect Elliot Rodger on May 24. All the weapons used in Friday's rampage "were legally purchased" and registered to the suspect, Brown told reporters. Hide Caption 10 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Flowers are placed in a bullet hole in the window of a delicatessen in Isla Vista on May 24. Hide Caption 11 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Richard Martinez, father of victim Christopher Martinez, breaks down as he talks to media outside the Santa Barbara County Sheriff's Office. "Our family has a message for every parent out there: You don't think it will happen to your child until it does," the visibly emotional parent said. Hide Caption 12 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – An investigator speaks on a cell phone while examining the gunman's car. Hide Caption 13 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – A woman looks at the bullet holes on the window of the deli where part of the shooting spree took place in Isla Vista, California. Hide Caption 14 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Flowers are left on the sidewalk of the IV Deli Mart in Isla Vista, California. Hide Caption 15 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Two women comfort each other Saturday near the scene of a shooting. Seven people also were being treated in a hospital for gunshot wounds or traumatic injuries, a sheriff's office spokeswoman said. Hide Caption 16 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – A Santa Barbara County deputy sheriff checks out the black BMW sedan driven by the suspected shooter. The gunman died from a gunshot wound after his car crashed, police said. It was unclear whether the fatal head wound was self-inflicted or the result of a firefight with police. Hide Caption 17 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – The car of the alleged shooter at the crime scene Saturday. Isla Vista is the residential quarter for students mostly enrolled in UCSB and some in Santa Barbara City College. The community sits on beachfront bluffs just west of UCSB. Hide Caption 18 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – The crime scene in the aftermath of the shooting. Hide Caption 19 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Broken glass at the shooting scene Saturday. Authorities said there were multiple crime scenes. Hide Caption 20 of 21 Photos: Photos: Deadly rampage in California town Deadly rampage in California college town – Fire trucks are parked outside an Isla Vista mart Friday night after the deadly rampage. The shootings occurred in a crowded area bustling with activity on Memorial Day weekend.

Hide Caption 21 of 21

I'm 22 years old and I'm still a virgin. I've never even kissed a girl. I've been through college for two and a half years, more than that actually, and I'm still a virgin. It has been very torturous. College is the time when everyone experiences those things such as sex and fun and pleasure. Within those years, I've had to rot in loneliness. It's not fair.

You girls have never been attracted to me. I don't know why you girls aren't attracted to me, but I will punish you all for it. It's an injustice, a crime, because... I don't know what you don't see in me. I'm the perfect guy and yet you throw yourselves at these obnoxious men instead of me, the supreme gentleman.

I will punish all of you for it. (laughs) On the day of retribution I'm going to enter the hottest sorority house of UCSB. And I will slaughter every spoiled, stuck-up, blond slut I see inside there. All those girls I've desired so much, they would have all rejected me and looked down upon me as an inferior man if I ever made a sexual advance towards them (scoffs) while they throw themselves at these obnoxious brutes. I'll take great pleasure in slaughtering all of you.

You will finally see that I am in truth the superior one. The true alpha male. (laughs) Yes. After I've annihilated every single girl in the sorority house, I will take to the streets of Isla Vista and slay every single person I see there. All those popular kids who live such lives of hedonistic pleasures while I've had to rot in loneliness for all these years. They've all looked down upon me every time I tried to go out and join them, they've all treated me like a mouse.

Well now I will be a god compared to you. You will all be animals. You are animals and I will slaughter you like animals. And I will be a god. Exacting my retribution on all those who deserve it. You do deserve it. Just for the crime of living a better life than me. All you popular kids, you've never accepted me, and now you will all pay for it. And girls, all I ever wanted was to love you, and to be loved by you. I've wanted a girlfriend, I've wanted sex, I've wanted love, affection, adoration. You think I'm unworthy of it. That's a crime that can never be forgiven.

If I can't have you, girls, I will destroy you. (laughs) You denied me a happy life, and in turn, I will deny all of you life. (laughs) It's only fair.

I hate all of you. Humanity is a disgusting, wretched, depraved species. If I had it in my power, I would stop at nothing (points finger at camera) to reduce every single one of you to mountains of skulls and rivers of blood. And rightfully so.

You deserve to be annihilated and I'll give that to you. You never showed me any mercy and so I will show you none. (laughs)

You've forced me to suffer all my life and now I'll force you all suffer. I've waited a long time for this. I'll give you exactly what you deserve. All of you. All you girls who rejected me and looked down upon me and you know, treated me like scum while you gave yourselves to other men. And all of you men, for living a better life than me, all of you sexually active men, I hate you. I hate all of you. I can't wait to give you exactly what you deserve. Utter annihilation. (laughs)