He killed before he was ever kissed.

Hours after posting a terrifying YouTube warning, a murderous, misogynistic, 22-year-old virgin killed six people and wounded 13 more near a California college.

Elliot Rodger, the hate-filled son of a Hollywood director, vowed in his video to exact his bloody vengeance against the sorority women who rejected him and the men who succeeded where he so often failed.

Then he set out Friday night to make good on his evil intentions — stabbing three men to death in his apartment before arming himself to the teeth and hopping into his black BMW to steal life from three others.

“You denied me a happy life, and in turn I will deny all of you life,” the baby-faced Rodger declares in the video titled “Elliot Rodger’s Retribution.”

After a mirthless laugh, his deranged diatribe continues.

“I hate all of you,” he says. “If I had it in my power, I would stop at nothing to reduce every single one of you to mountains of skulls and rivers of blood.”

Rodger was found dead Friday night inside his luxury car after blasting away with a semiautomatic handgun at people on the street and local sheriff’s deputies.

After a roving gun battle with cops left him with a bullet to his hip, Rodger apparently shot himself in the head, authorities said.

“We heard so many gunshots, it was unbelievable,” said witness Alexander Mattera, 23, whose bleeding friend Chris Johnson staggered into a stranger’s house after taking a bullet.

(New York Daily News)

Santa Barbara County Sheriff Bill Brown described the orgy of violence as “the work of a madman.”

Less than 24 hours after Rodger was killed, a 141-page manifesto penned by the lovelorn loner arrived at a local TV station.

In the rambling screed, titled “My Twisted World,” Rodger breathlessly detailed his struggles to find love and acceptance — and explained how they led him to seek blood.

Thousands gather at a park in Isla Vista, Calif., on Saturday for a candlelight vigil to honor the victims of Friday night's mass shooting. (Jae C. Hong/AP) Two UCSB students comfort each other during a candlelight vigil on Saturday. (Jae C. Hong/AP) Students and community members grieve victims of Friday's shooting rampage at an Isla Vista park on Saturday. (MICHAEL NELSON/EPA) Students march on the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara on Saturday during a candlelight vigil held to honor the victims of Friday night's mass shooting. (Jae C. Hong/AP) A man places a candle at a makeshift memorial next to the Isla Vista Deli Mart, where one of the victims of the deadly shooting rampage was killed in Isla Vista. (MICHAEL NELSON/EPA)

“All of those beautiful girls I’ve desired so much in my life, but can never have because they despise and loathe me, I will destroy,” wrote Rodger, the son of Peter Rodger, whose screen credits include work on “The Hunger Games.”

“All of those popular people who live hedonistic lives of pleasure, I will destroy, because they never accepted me as one of them. I will kill them all and make them suffer, just as they have made me suffer. It is only fair.”

"I would have to kill my housemates to get them out of the way," he also wrote. "In fact, I'd even enjoy stabbing them both to death while they slept."

Three bodies were removed by coroners from Rodger's Isla Vista apartment on Saturday. (Splash News) Santa Barbara County coroners removed three bodies from the Capri Apartment building (pictured) in Isla Vista where Elliot Rodger reportedly lived with roommates. (Splash News) Three bodies were removed by coroners from Rodger's Isla Vista apartment building (right) on Saturday.

Rodger’s rampage across a swath of Isla Vista, a coastal town near the University of California, Santa Barbara, started at his apartment complex.

The Santa Barbara City College student fatally stabbed two of his roommates, Cheng Yuan Hong, 20, and George Chen, 19, and a third victim, Weihan Wang, 20, in his apartment sometime before 9:30 p.m., authorities said.

The three victims were “stabbed repeatedly with sharp objects,” said Brown. “It was a pretty horrific crime scene.”

Elliot Rodger complained about being denied love and affection from women in written and video rants. (via Facebook)

Rodger then took off in his car. He was armed with three semiautomatic handguns — a Glock 34 and two Sig Sauer P226s — and several hundred rounds of ammunition.

His first stop was an Alpha Phi sorority house in the center of town. Rodger banged on the locked front door, but no one opened it.

Moments later, he shot three women outside — two of them fatally. The dead were identified as Katie Cooper, 22, and Veronika Weiss, 19.

The father of shooting victim Christopher Martinez mourned for his son at a press conference on Saturday and blamed politicians and the NRA for not doing enough for gun control. (MICHAEL NELSON/EPA)

Witness Kyle Sullivan, 19, came upon the three victims as one of them, struck in her torso, had just called her mom.

“She was telling her mother about how much she loved her and she wasn’t sure if she was gonna make it,” Sullivan said.

Rodger then drove to a nearby deli where he got out of his car and opened fire at the people inside — killing 20-year-old Christopher Ross Michael-Martinez, Brown said.

The day after his son was shot and killed in a tragic mass-shooting, Richard Martinez cries at a press conference and spoke out in rage and sorrow for the unnecessary violence. (MICHAEL NELSON/EPA)

“The guy unloaded a full clip, a nine clip,” witness Manny Rodriguez told the Los Angeles Times. “He was shooting fast.”

Still not done, Rodger got back in his car and started spraying bullets. Over a span of a few minutes, he fired dozens of rounds from his vehicle.

The end came after the second of two gun battles with cops. Rodger, nursing his own bullet wound, stepped on the gas and struck the second cyclist, Brown said.

Dramatic moment < Isla Vista shooting presser as father of Christopher Martinez shows picture of dead son breaks down pic.twitter.com/T7ksLvtW2u — Andrew Blankstein (@anblanx) May 24, 2014

The victim landed on the front of Rodger’s BMW, caving in the windshield. The vehicle then collided with several parked cars and came to a stop.

The deputies grabbed Rodger’s body out the car and cuffed him, but he was "obviously dead with a gunshot wound to the head," Brown said.

Of the 13 people Rodger wounded, eight suffered gunshot wounds, four were hit by his vehicle and one had an injury of unknown origin.

Isla Vista shooter Elliot Rodger was undergoing psychiatric care, according to his family. (Facebook) The family of Elliot Rodger (right) called police several weeks ago over concerns about his creepy YouTube videos. (Facebook) Elliot Rodger (far left and far right) in Facebook photos with his loved ones, including father Peter Rodger, second unit director of 'Hunger Games.'

Deputies discovered more than 400 rounds of ammunition inside the car. All three of his weapons were purchased legally, Brown said.

In an impromptu press conference Saturday night, the enraged father of Michael-Martinez delivered a blistering rebuke of pro-gun politicians.

“Why did Chris die? Chris died because of craven, irresponsible politicians, and the NRA,” said Richard Martinez, his voice rising.

University of California, Santa Barbara students Veronika Weiss (left) and Katie Cooper, who were killed by gunman Elliot Rodger. (Facebook)

“They talk about gun rights. What about Chris’ right to live?!

“When will this insanity stop?!” he added.

“When will enough people say, ‘Stop this madness.’ We don’t have to live like this. Too many have died. We should say to ourselves, ‘Not one more!’”

In an exclusive interview, the father of Veronika Weiss said his daughter was only a freshman and she “was loving every minute of it” and likely would not have scorned Rodger.

“My daughter would probably have been a friend to him because of the way she was. She was always drawn to the ones with the broken wings,” the devastated father told the Daily News. “She was the opposite of what he thought he was shooting. She was the kind who would have reached out to him. She reached out to the kids who weren’t the most popular or the cutest.”

On Saturday, thousands of community members and UCSB students gathered at an Isla Vista park for a candlelight vigil to remember the victims of the rampage.

Isla Vista shooter Elliot Rodger's drove a black BMW. (Facebook) Isla Vista shooter Elliot Rodger claimed he was a virgin, rejected for years by girls. (Facebook)

Alan Shifman, the lawyer for Rodger’s father, said Saturday that his family called police several weeks ago over concerns about YouTube videos where the son mused about murder and suicide.

It was the third of three bizarre run-ins Rodger had with cops over the past year.

In the first, he claimed to be the victim of assault, but deputies believe he may have been the aggressor in a fight.

Bodies are seen covered on the ground after a mass shooting near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara in Isla Vista, Calif., on Friday. (John Palminteri/AP) A body is covered on the ground after a mass shooting near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara in Isla Vista, Calif., on Friday. (John Palminteri/AP) Bodies are seen covered on the ground after a mass shooting near the campus of the University of California at Santa Barbara in Isla Vista, Calif., on Friday.

Rodger later contacted police and accused his roommate, Cheng Hong, of stealing $22 worth of candles from him. Hong was booked into jail, but released. He later pleaded guilty to petty theft after Rodger filed a citizen complaint in January, Santa Barbara County District Attorney Joyce Dudley told the LA Daily News.

Officers, after interviewing the lonely Rodger, described him as a “perfectly polite, kind and wonderful human being,” said Shifman.

Brown confirmed that Rodger downplayed his problems, and the deputies cleared the call.

Police and medics examine an unidentified man who sustained injuries Friday during a drive-by shooting in Isla Vista, Calif. The man was taken to hospital where he is reportedly recovering. (KAMILO BUSTAMANTE/AFP/Getty Images )

Rodger recounted the episode in his creepy manifesto.

“I had the striking and devastating fear that someone had somehow discovered what I was planning to do, and reported me for it,” he wrote.

“If that was the case, the police would have searched my room, found all of my guns and weapons, along with my writings about what I plan to do with them. I would have been thrown in jail, denied of the chance to exact revenge on my enemies. I can’t imagine a hell darker than that. Thankfully, that wasn’t the case, but it was so close.”

A man looks through a window with bullet holes Saturday at a deli that was one of 12 crime scenes after series of shootings that left seven people dead — including the gunman — in the Isla Vista section of Santa Barbara. (JONATHAN ALCORN/REUTERS) The scene of the mass shooting in the college town of Isla Vista, Calif., that left seven dead, including the shooter, and 13 wounded. (Splash News) Police investigate a scene after a mass shooting near the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara in Isla Vista, Calif., on Friday. (John Palminteri/AP) One crime scene was The Loop Isla Vista near UCSB. (Ed Mertz/ KNX1070) Scene of a shooting near the University of California, Santa Barbara, where a gunman killed six and wounded 13. (France Kirsten via Twitter)

Shifman acknowledged that the younger Rodger had trouble making friends and lacked female companionship — a topic the mass murderer mentioned obsessively in his seven-minute video.

The chilling and creepy YouTube clip offered insights into the twisted mind behind the remorseless rampage.

The disturbed speaker says he’s a virgin who has never as much as kissed a girl, despite his best efforts since puberty to find “sex ... love, affection, adoration.”

Now, he makes it clear, the time for revenge had arrived.

“On the day of retribution, I am going to enter the hottest sorority house of UCSB and I will slaughter every single spoiled, stuck-up, blond slut I see inside there,” he announces. “All those girls that I’ve desired so much.”

“I’ll take great pleasure in slaughtering all of you,” he says later. “You will finally see that I am in truth the superior one. The true alpha male.”

The man in the video then pauses for another horrifying laugh.

At the end he denounces “all you girls who rejected me” and “all of you sexually active men.”

“I hate you,” he sneers. “I hate all of you, and I can’t wait to give you exactly what you deserve — utter annihilation.”

The shootings took place at several locations as Rodger cruised slowly through town, firing from the driver’s side window, authorities said.

“I heard shots, screams, pain,” student Michael Vitak told KEYT-TV after the shooting.

Vitak said he watched in horror as one woman was killed and a second seriously wounded. “I hope she is going to be fine,” he said.

Other witnesses described bullets zipping past their heads. Sierra Swartz told KEYT-TV that she initially thought the gunman was shooting an air pistol.

“He shot and I felt like I just felt the wind pass right by my face,” she said. “I went to a random person’s house and I just ran inside and I was like, ‘Honestly, like someone just shot at me.’

E.J. Debowski was standing on his porch when he saw Rodger’s black BMW barreling toward a skateboarder.

Debowski watched in horror as the car slammed into the boarder, identified as Elliott Gee, a UCSB junior.

“His skateboard flew in the air," Debowski told the Los Angeles Time. "His face was bloody, but he was able to respond to our questions."

In Rodger’s manifesto, he gleefully describes his plans to torture his victims — the good-looking, popular girls he has longed for all his life.

“I have lived a life of pain and suffering, and it was time to bring that pain to people who actually deserve it,” Rodger wrote.

“I will cut them, flay them, strip all the skin off their flesh, and pour boiling water all over them while they are still alive, as well as any other form of torture I could possibly think of.”

With Thomas Tracy

Bonnie Robinson reported from Isla Vista, Calif.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH ‘ELLIOT RODGER’S RETRIBUTION.’

CLICK HERE TO READ RODGER'S RAMBLING MANIFESTO.

CLICK HERE TO WATCH RODGER'S STRANGE DRIVE TO WHITNEY HOUSTON SONG.

CLICK HERE TO WATCH NEWS REPORT ON SHOOTING.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!