Three victims in Santa Barbara rampage from Bay Area

Three of the victims killed in a deadly rampage Friday near Santa Barbara are from the Bay Area, the Santa Barbara County Sheriff's Office said Sunday.

Cheng Yuan Hong, 20, and George Chen, 19, both of San Jose, along with Weihan Wang, 20, of Fremont were stabbed multiple times in suspect Elliot Rodger's apartment, authorities said.

All three victims were UC Santa Barbara students. Authorities said Hong and Chen, along with Rodger, were on the lease as tenants of the apartment on the 6500 block of Seville Road in Isla Vista. Investigators were working to determine if Wang was a roommate or just visiting the residence.

According to UCSB student newspaper, the Daily Nexus, Hong, who went by James, was majoring in computer engineering and volunteered as a teaching assistant at Rainbow Chinese School in Cupertino.

Investigators believe Rodger killed the three victims before then going on a shooting rampage around Isla Vista that left four more dead, including the gunman.

Thirteen others were wounded in the melee late Friday.







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Photo: Jae C. Hong, Associated Press Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Flowers are placed through a bullet hole on a window of IV Deli Mart, where part of Friday night's mass shooting took place by a drive-by shooter, on Saturday, May 24, 2014, in Isla Vista, Calif. Sheriff's officials say Elliot Rodger, 22, went on a rampage near the University of California, Santa Barbara, stabbing three people to death at his apartment before shooting and killing three more in a crime spree through a nearby neighborhood. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong) less Flowers are placed through a bullet hole on a window of IV Deli Mart, where part of Friday night's mass shooting took place by a drive-by shooter, on Saturday, May 24, 2014, in Isla Vista, Calif. Sheriff's ... more Photo: Jae C. Hong, Associated Press Image 2 of 4 Two students comfort each other during a candlelight vigil held to honor the victims of Friday night's mass shooting on Saturday, May 24, 2014, in Isla Vista, Calif. Sheriff's officials say Elliot Rodger, 22, went on a rampage near the University of California, Santa Barbara, stabbing three people to death at his apartment before shooting and killing three more in a crime spree through a nearby neighborhood. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong) less Two students comfort each other during a candlelight vigil held to honor the victims of Friday night's mass shooting on Saturday, May 24, 2014, in Isla Vista, Calif. Sheriff's officials say Elliot Rodger, 22, ... more Photo: Jae C. Hong, Associated Press Image 3 of 4 A woman places a candle in front of IV Deli Mart, where par of Friday night's mass shooting took place by a drive-by shooter, on Saturday, May 24, 2014, in the beach community of Isla Vista, Calif. Sheriff's officials say Elliot Rodger, 22, went on a rampage near the University of California, Santa Barbara, stabbing three people to death at his apartment before shooting and killing three more in a crime spree through a nearby neighborhood. (AP Photo/Jae C. Hong) less A woman places a candle in front of IV Deli Mart, where par of Friday night's mass shooting took place by a drive-by shooter, on Saturday, May 24, 2014, in the beach community of Isla Vista, Calif. Sheriff's ... more Photo: Jae C. Hong, Associated Press Image 4 of 4 Three victims in Santa Barbara rampage from Bay Area 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

Rodger penned a disturbing manifesto and posted at least 22 videos on YouTube in the weeks leading up the attack where he voiced contempt, mostly for women, whom he said kept him a virgin for all of his 22 years.

Deputies found three semi-automatic handguns along with 400 unspent rounds in his black BMW after the shooting rampage was over.