Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

The roommates murdered by British killer Elliot Rodger were just two weeks from fleeing their apartment to escape the “strange” loner, friends revealed today.

Cheng Yuan Hong and Weihan ‘David’ Wang, both 20, were the first victims of Rodger’s blood-soaked rampage on Friday night.

They were knifed to death alongside George Chen, 19, who was visiting for the night, police in Santa Barbara, California, believe.

Detectives are investigating whether the trio were slaughtered as they slept, as Rodger, 22, sickeningly detailed in his 141-page manifesto ‘My Twisted World” before embarking on his murderous journey.

As the first pictures of the three emerged today, a fellow resident in the Capri apartments said Hong and Wang were desperate to get away from Rodger, who they described to others as “strange”.

The pair planned to move out at the end of the current semester, just over two weeks away in mid-June, the friend said.

In January, Rodger, the son of Hollywood film-maker Peter Rodger, performed a citizen’s arrest on Hong, alleging he had stolen candles worth $22 from him.

Sat on the grass opposite the two-storey apartment block where killer and victims lived for several months, the friend, who did not want to be named, told ABC7 News: “They were really good kids. They were so quiet. They were extremely smart.”

The man said while he got on with Hong, from San Jose, and Wang, from Fremont, also California, he couldn’t connect with Rodger, who posted a YouTube video online telling of his deadly intentions.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

The friend added: “In his video he describes himself as a gentlemen. Well, he never talked. To be a gentleman who need to actually say stuff.”

Rodger, originally from London and who grew up in West Sussex, killed because he was still a virgin. His anger towards women soon festered into a wider deep resentment towards others.

In his manifesto he told in graphic terms how his ‘Day of Retribution’ would be an attack in stages, which included killing his stepbrother and stepmother.

He originally wanted to do it on Valentine’s Day, “the holiday that made me feel the most miserable and insulted”, but needed more time to plan properly.

After postponing it to April 26, he woke up with a cold so pushed it back to May 24.

He wrote about planning to lure people into his apartment to torture and kill them, hurting the best looking for longest “assuming that the good-looking ones had the best sex lives”.

Rodger then fantasised about going to the Alpha Phi Sorority where he said the most beautiful girls were.

(Image: Enterprise News and Pictures)

Assuming he would not have been caught by then, he planned the next day to kill his stepmother, Moroccan-born actress Soumaya Akaaboune, and step-brother Jazz, six.

The deranged killer wrote: “I will not allow the boy to surpass me at everything, to live the life I’ve always wanted. It’s not fair that he has the chance to have a pleasurable life while I’ve been denied it.

“It will be a hard thing to do, because I had really bonded with my little brother in the last year, and he respected and looked up to me. But I would have to do it. If I can’t live a pleasurable life, then neither will he! I will not let him put my legacy to shame.

“In order to kill Jazz, I would have to kill Soumaya too, but that will be easy.

“But what if father is in the house to stop me? Would I have to kill him too? That would be too much. I remember, when I was a child, I had dreams about my father dying, and I woke up crying to my mother, in which she would comfort me and tell me that it was just a dream.

“How could my life have resorted to the point where I am the one to kill my own father? I felt sick to my stomach.

“I concluded that I would have to set the Day of Retribution during a time when my father is out of the country, on one of his business trips.

“It would be too risky to try to kill him. I might hesitate at the last second.”

All of Rodger’s eventual victims were students at the University of California in Santa Barbara.

After the bloodshed at the Isla Vista apartment, Veronika Weiss, 19, was gunned down Friday along with Katie Breann Cooper, 22, outside the Alpha Phi sorority house.

Christopher Michael-Martinez, 20, was murdered in cold blood in a local deli.

His spree, in which he then drove along firing from his car and mowing down two cyclists, left 13 others injured in just 10 minutes. Rodger eventually turned a gun on himself.

Classes at the university were cancelled for today and tomorrow, with a second candlelight vigil being held in memory of the dead tonight and a memorial service set for later tomorrow. Flowers had been put into the bullet holes left in walls and windows.

About 200 people attended a memorial service late on Sunday at St. Mark’s University Parish, pausing in front of poster boards dedicated to three of the dead, Veronika, Katie and Christopher before the identities of Rodger’s roommates were confirmed.

(Image: Enterprise News and Pictures)

Chancellor Henry Yang said: “This is a period of mourning for all of us.

“The moving candlelight vigil that our students organised on Saturday evening began the process of healing.

“On Tuesday we will remember and honour the victims of this horrible event, and come together as an academic community to reflect, talk with each other, and think about the future.

“As terrible as these past two days have been, they make us believe in our students and the entire UCSB community more than ever.”

As he embarked on his murderous plot, Rodger emailed his manifesto to 30 people including his mother Chin Rodger, father, therapist, former teachers and friends.

Included on the list was childhood friend Philip Bloeser, 22, who he had invited round to his apartment for the weekend.

His mother, Cathleen Bloeser, revealed the warning signs had been there for some time.

Mrs Bloeser, 58, said: “We could see that he was turning. He’d changed emotionally, and he’d become very despondent and he wanted to get back at people.

“I have a feeling that they would have been right there as a part of it and shot as well.”

(Image: Enterprise News and Pictures)

Grieving dad Richard Martinez, whose son Christopher was last to die, hit out at US lawmakers tonight.

He told CNN: “We’re all proud to be Americans. But what kind of message does it send to the world when we have such a rudderless bunch of idiots in government?

“I can’t tell you how angry I am. It’s just awful, and no parent should have to go through this.”

Martinez said his son died because Congress had failed to act after a mentally ill gunman killed 26 people in December 2012 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut.

“These people are getting rich sitting in Congress. And what do they do? They don’t take care of our kids,” he added.