If University of Santa Barbara student Antoine Cherchian hadn't had too much to drink on that fateful night last May when Elliott Rodger went on his deadly rampage, he would not have survived.,

Now Cherchian is speaking out to Daily Mail Online for the first time since he was shot five times in the killing spree by the twisted virgin killer, who murdered six students and injured 14 others before taking his own life.

And last week, history almost repeated itself when two people were shot and a third was assaulted in an attack in Isla Vista - the same neighborhood where Rodger, 22, staged his murder spree last year.

Cherchian says that the students are still in mourning from last year's massacre and it’s transformed the atmosphere in the town forever.

Scroll down for video

Survivor: Antoine Cherchian, 25, was in critical condition after he was shot five times by Elliott Rodger. One of the bullets grazed his heart and another exploded in his organs. ' I’m not mad at Rodger, I forgave him, I learnt all about him afterwards and felt sorry for him. I remember waking up in hospital with tubes in my mouth and the first thing I saw was Elliot’s face on the TV screen'

Mass murderer: The driver's license photo of Elliot Rodger, 22, who went on a murderous rampage last May. Rodger killed six people and injured 14 others near the University of California, Santa Barbara campus

Cherchian barely survived the UCSB massacre. Antoine is underneath the white sheets on the stretcher, one of 14 people wounded in the UCSB massacre. He was transferred to Santa Barbara Cottage Hospital where paramedics worked day and night to save his life

‘The place has changed, you can cut the atmosphere like a knife and the incident last week is only going to make things worse,' he tells Daily Mail Online.

'You can’t walk the streets for fear of something is going to happen. The place is a ghost town after 9pm on some nights, people still remember last year and now it’s going to get worse,’ says Antoine.

In the stabbing and shooting spree last year, British-born Rodger killed six of his fellow Santa Barbara students and injured 14 others near campus before killing himself.

Antoine, 25, a third year history student, feels no anger, he just feels lucky to be alive after being shot five times across his upper body including one bullet that grazed his heart and another that exploded in his internal organs.

He was transferred to Santa Barbara Cottage Hospital where paramedics worked day and night to save his life and he formed a remarkable bond with other gunshot victims, as they were all in the Intensive Care Unit together.

It was there that he learned everyone’s stories, shedding new light on Rodger’s warped frame of mind at the time of the killing.

‘There were many people in recovery, there was a community between us, we all talked about it, everybody was super pissed, mad at the government, mad at sociopaths, mad at America. There was one guy who got shot in the genitals, he was so angry.

Recovering: Antoine had been hit five times, one just inches from his heart, others on his arm, right side, hip and pelvis. One bullet went through the kidney, ruptured the liver and sliced the small intestine into two pieces, which required six hours of surgery

One bullet went through Antoine's back and ruptured his internal organs including liver, kidney and small intestine

'This shows how crazy our attacker was, he was a virgin, he was purposely shooting all the men in the crotch and he missed mine by inches,’ explains Antoine.

‘Another guy called Chris was running away, he got shot in the kneecaps, and now he can't walk properly. He was telling me about the fear.

'There was this one girl in there, and she says that he stopped the car he was in, and said: ‘One question, how ya’ doing?’ Then shoots her in the face, but she turns as he does it, and only grazes it. Next moment, he’s killed two other girls on the lawn.’

But it was Antoine who was in the worst state after Rodger drove up to him as he was skateboarding his way home from a party. Doctors say it was only because he’d had a few drinks that he was able to survive.

‘It was 8.30 in the evening, I heard this roaring car, a black BMW with the windscreen totally smashed in.

This photo shows the scene of the drive-by shooting that left seven people dead, including Elliot. ‘It was 8.30 in the evening, I heard this roaring car, a black BMW with the windscreen totally smashed in,' says Antoine

'I think: "That’s kind of odd" and it’s going at enormous speed, but then slams on the brakes and all I see is the silver tip of a gun from the passenger window. I don’t see his face, I just hear bam, bam, bam, bam.

'If I’d stood still I’d be dead, but I was spinning around as he was firing, it was like a scene out of Terminator or Saving Private Ryan. I thought he was hitting a cap gun.

'He used a gun that Navy SEALs use, if it was cheap then the bullets would have stuck instead of going right through me.

‘I started falling asleep, but my buddy Alexander, who’d hidden behind a car, was slapping me in the face. The paramedics kept asking me what day it was, I said 1984. I thought this was it. i just wanted to sleep. If I’d been sober, I would have been traumatized to death.

‘The chief of police said it was the craziest thing he’d ever seen. I've never been religious, but something happened, I had an angel on my shoulder, it wasn’t my time.’

Antoine had been hit five times, one just inches from his heart, others on his arm, right side, hip and pelvis. One bullet went through the kidney, ruptured the liver and sliced the small intestine into two pieces, which required six hours of surgery.

Another bullet is now lodged permanently in his behind, as doctors have said it would cause more harm to remove it. He was in ICU for nearly a week and had to learn to walk again using a walker, then a cane. He’s now recovered and lives with his girlfriend, fellow student Carolyn Kilgore, 21.

‘The town is still in mourning, it’s never forgotten. This is the last thing anyone needs, it brings back all the memories for all the students. UCSB feels like it’s always going to have a bad aura over it.

'This is a college town, things should not be like this.

This wall of remembrance for the victims of Elliott Rodger was put on the University of Santa Barbara college campus for students to sign

A memorial garden for the victims has been constructed at People's Park next to the college campus in time for the anniversary

'This town has gone to s***. Isla has changed so much, it’s a different vibe, it's more like a police state, everyone is upset, everyone is shell-shocked.

'There’s people crying on every corner. People are still afraid, my friends have panic attacks. There's a lot more police, we never had SWAT cars before, now they’re everywhere.

'After last year, many people packed their stuff, left town, and never came back, their parents wouldn’t let them.

’It’s left a huge scar, it’s a wound that will never heal, I will always remember it. But there’s also some sickos who’ve played on it.

'There’s people locally tagging Elliot Rodger as a superhero, There’s a guy around town wearing an Elliot Rodger shirt saying he was a hero and someone locally has set up a Facebook fan page. What sort of town is this?’

UCSB are honoring the dead by holding a memorial lighting installation and candlelight vigil on May 23.

They’ve also put up a permanent graffiti wall for students to express their sorrow and a memorial garden in People’s Park next to the campus.

Rodger's first three victims were his roommates, David Wang and James Hong, and a friend, George Chen, who were stabbed dozens of times with a 9-inch boar-hunting knife.

After Rodger killed himself, police found three semi-automatic handguns and nearly 550 unspent rounds in his car. All were purchased legally.

He’d written a 137-page manifesto outlining his murderous plans.

But now Antoine is facing just as big a battle because, a week after he left the hospital, he was presented with medical bills which totaled over $200,000.

‘The bills started coming immediately, it was like: “Hope you’re feeling better, here’s a 200 grand bill. I was telling the hospital I didn't have insurance, but they still looked after me. It was $20,000 for the anesthesiologist, $5,000 for the ambulance, $70,000 for surgery, $15,000 for therapy on my legs, the neurologist cost $15,000 and the aftercare was about $100,000 in total.

‘The debt collectors started calling during the summer and haven’t stopped, asking how I would like to pay. I had to say I didn't have the money, but they said you have to sort it, I said how, I can’t even walk.

Antoine was in ICU for nearly a week and had to learn to walk again using a walker, then a cane. He’s now recovered and lives with his girlfriend, fellow student Carolyn Kilgore, 21. Antoine, whose father Ralph is a New York attorney, is now suing Santa Barbara County Sheriff’s Department for negligence and seeking damages.

‘I didn't even go for physical therapy for my hand, which had nerve damage. I just tossed these bills aside, until the Isla Vista Victims Unit contacted me and said the council would pay, but I don’t even know if that’s happened yet, as I keep getting bills.’

Antoine, who’s father Ralph is a New York attorney, is now suing Santa Barbara County Sheriff’s Department for negligence and seeking damages. He says that they didn’t do their job properly and do simple checks on Rodger, which resulted in him being severely injured.

‘I don’t even mind guns, I just want harder gun control. Anyone with a pulse can get a gun. His mother called the police, his therapist said he was a danger, but the police went to his house and said he was just lonely, no psychological check. If I get pulled over for not wearing a seat belt, then I get checked,’ says Antoine.