In disturbing videos posted on YouTube before his alleged California killing spree, 22-year-old Elliot Rodger told the world how he felt about women. “If I can’t have you, girls, I will destroy you,” he said in one confessional. The misogynistic rants surfaced over the weekend after Rodger, according to police, killed six people and then himself on May 23 in Santa Barbara. His mother had recently tried to seek psychological help for him, according to a family friend who spoke to the Associated Press. While the horrific killings raise serious questions about gun violence and mental health in a country that has seen too many mass murders in recent years to recount, Rodger’s comments about women — in videos and a written diary — have sparked a specific debate that has taken on a life of its own, via the Twitter hashtag #YesAllWomen. Whether his actions were motivated by misogyny or mental illness, or both, remains unclear, but Rodger’s anti-female manifesto nevertheless prompted a viral airing of grievancesabout the unique threats and challenges women face because they are women.

Article Continued Below

In his YouTube videos, Rodger spoke hatefully about many targeted groups, including his roommates — three of whom were victims in the killings, according to police — but he reserved a special form of malice for the opposite sex. “You girls have never been attracted to me,” he said in his final video, filmed as he sat behind the wheel of a car. He stared into the camera, delivering a disturbing soliloquy that appears to have been practised. “I don’t know why you girls aren’t attracted to me. But I will punish you all for it. It is an injustice, a crime. Because I don’t know what you don’t see in me. I am the perfect guy, and yet you throw yourselves at all these obnoxious men instead of me — the supreme gentleman. “I will punish all of you for it,” he repeated, punctuating the threat with a rehearsed laugh that is uncomfortable to watch.

The #YesAllWomen conversation appears to have been a reaction to the “not all men” argument that inevitably arises when women speak about everyday sexism and misogyny as societal problems, which was exactly what happened on Twitter as people began viewing and commenting on Rodger’s troubling videos. The hashtag originated in a conversation between Annie Cardi, a Massachusetts author, and another woman whose account settings have since been made private. “It’s not ‘all men are dangerous’ but ‘all women live with some element of threat,’” Cardi wrote. Later, she added: “Sounds like something that needs to get shared right now. #YesAllWomen.” The hashtag quickly caught on, with people all over the world sharing experiences of sexism, intimidation, sexual violence and abuse. “I shouldn’t have to hold my car keys in hand like a weapon & check over my shoulder every few seconds when I walk at night,” said one Twitter user. “‘I have a BF’ is more effective than saying ‘I'm not interested’ bc men respect other men more than my right to say no,” wrote another. By Monday #YesAllWomen was being used all over the world, celebrities had weighed in on it and several counter-hashtags had sprung up, including #NotAllMen and #YesAllPeople. The counter hashtags, predictably, sparked further backlash. “#YesAllWomen,” wrote a Twitter user identified only as Priya, “because we can’t talk about our fears and our experiences in even a HASHTAG without men coming to turn it into #YesAllPeople.” With files from Shauna Rempel and The Associated Press

Read more about: