Is Daniel Ricciardo the right choice to replace Mark Webber at Red Bull? Have your say

Updated

Australian driver Daniel Ricciardo has been unveiled as compatriot Mark Webber's replacement at Red Bull, but is he the right choice?

In June, Webber announced this would be his last season in F1 with the 36-year-old moving to Porsche in the LMP1 sportscar programme.

After months of speculation and rumours surrounding who will partner triple world champion Sebastian Vettel, the young man from Perth got the nod ahead of rumoured applicants Kimi Raikkonen, Fernando Alonso and Jean Eric Vergne (and a lorry driver who sent his CV in together with a copy of his clean licence).

Was he the right choice? Emily Benammar weighs up both arguments:

Yes: Ricciardo is the right man for the job

Red Bull is a team that advocates the importance and success of the young driver scheme - former Toro Rosso driver Sebastian Vettel's success speaks for itself.

They had to go for a younger driver to boost the program which - besides Vettel - has failed to produce the promised goods.

While many would argue that grooming a triple world champion is enough to justify the scheme, Red Bull not going with one of their "own grown" drivers would have made a mockery of the whole system.

Ricciardo, 24, is just two seasons into what has the potential to flourish into a hugely successful F1 career while other rumoured candidates Raikkonen (33) and Alonso (32), will become the oldest and third oldest drivers on the grid after Webber's departure.

If successful, Ricciardo has the potential to give Red Bull a decade of world class driving. The team had to think beyond the next two or three seasons.

Raikkonen meanwhile, may have given Red Bull cause for concern regarding loyalty and longevity.

Ricciardo v Raikkonen: Ricciardo Raikkonen Australian Nationality Finnish Silverstone 2011, HRT Debut Australia 2001, Sauber 42 Races entered 188 0 Podiums 75 22 Points 920 0 World titles 1 7 (x1) Highest finish 1 (x20) 5 (x1) Highest grid 1 (x16)

As previously stated, Raikkonen is 33 years-old and even if retirement is not on the cards, we have seen in the past that the Finn’s desires come before loyalty.

In 2009 he walked away from Formula One after Ferrari paid him off.

Despite a flurry of rumoured offers, Raikkonen turned to rallying and went on to compete in the WRC for three seasons before returning to F1 with Lotus in 2012.

The potential to develop another world champion in Ricciardo is what chief technical officer Adrian Newey cited as being central to the decision to go for Ricciardo.

"We could have taken an experienced driver, somebody guaranteed to deliver to a relatively known level, or equally we could take on a much younger driver in the hope that they’ll develop to a very high level," he said.

Don't forget, Vettel only had the one race win (Monza 2008) to his name when he made the switch from Toro Rosso to Red Bull.

Red Bull is a natural progression for Ricciardo, a driver that has been affiliated with the team since 2008.

That said, why not opt for Ricciardo's Toro Rosso team-mate Vergne? He's young, keen and also affiliated with the team.

On paper the Frenchman just edges the Australian in terms of points scored across the two seasons they have been team-mates but Ricciardo is a more consistent driver then Vergne.

Since the start of the 2012 season, Vergne has scored 29 points to Ricciardo's 22, but the Frenchman has eight retirements to the Australian's three.

Ricciardo is also the more experienced driver with 42 grands prix to his name (also including his time at HRT) and this experience was central to Christian Horner's decision to give the Aussie driver the nod at the Young Driver's Test at Silverstone in July.

While the decision left Vergne's nose a little out of joint, Ricciardo impressed in the car and, more importantly, won praise from Red Bull team owner Dietrich Mateschitz.

Despite running off the track at one point, Ricciardo showed good pace in the car and clocked the third fastest time of the day (he registered the fastest in his Toro Rosso).

Who backed Ricciardo?

Hulkenberg: "I would like to pick him (Ricciardo). Daniel is a fast guy, and finally a young driver would get the chance to prove himself,” said the former Force India driver.

Vettel: "It would make sense for [it to be] Ricciardo as he has been at Red Bull for a long time. People will argue that he might not be ready but was I ready when I joined?"

No: it should have been a more experienced driver

Red Bull opting for the younger in experienced driver won't be a popular choice among all F1 fans, particularly those wanting to see Vettel pushed harder by his team-mate.

Raikkonen, more than any other driver on the grid, would have done just that.

He is one of the best drivers on the grid, a former world champion with a proven record in both qualifying and racing - he came with a guarantee, Ricciardo did not.

And initially it seemed a no-brainer that Red Bull would go for him - after all, they said they wanted the two best drivers on the grid to be in their cars - based on performance this season, that's Vettel and Raikkonen

Raikkonen has 75 podium finishes to his name, has scored 920 points in 188 grands prix entered, 20 wins and 16 pole positions.

His experience would have been priceless next season when the rule changes come in and the same could also be said about Fernando Alonso had he been in the running late on.

Teams will have less of an idea about what is and is not working on the car in 2014 and as such driver input will be vital.

That's not to say Ricciardo's input will not be valuable to his engineers, but when comparing the two drivers, it makes sense that Raikkonen, a driver that's been in and out of the sport since 2001, would provide better feedback than Ricciardo, who has driven a quarter of the number of races.

The Finn was the obvious choice for Red Bull in its bid to ensure it retains the constructors title which is so central to their financial backing.

Even Horner was still keen on the Finn as recently as Spa where he also suggested that Ricciardo was not a dead cert.

“Kimi is very much his own man. I think at the end of the day he will do what is best for him," he said.

"We are in a fortunate position where there is an awful lot of interest in the seat and we have got a bit of time until we need to make any firm commitments.

"Daniel has done a very good job in the test he has done for us, and the recent races he has done for Toro Rosso. But that doesn’t mean it is a foregone conclusion."

Red Bull made it clear that money was not a factor in this decision, so then why no push the boat out and secure yourself the rumoured most expensive driver on the grid?

Raikkonen would certainly ensure more sponsorship and as said more victories there for adding even more depth to the apparent bottomless pit that is the Red Bull purse.

There is also the possibility that having won three titles with Red Bull (so far), Vettel may fancy a change of team when his contract comes to an end in 2015.

As we have seen year in and year out, contracts and seeing them through means very little in the world of F1.

If Raikkonen had replaced Webber then he would be all set for a season or two in the number one drive, but unless Ricciardo proves to be as good as or better than Vettel, he is not good enough to lead the team.

So unless Ricciardo proves himself to be as good as or better than Vettel, Red Bull would find themselves in desperate need of a world champion level driver.

Who backed Kimi?

Sebastien Buemi: "I would expect a world champion team to take a world champion driver."

Lewis Hamilton: "It would be really cool to see Kimi in a Red Bull. He would give Seb a hard time. Kimi is an incredible driver, everyone knows that, so with an even better car it would be interesting to see what he does with that.”

Have your say:

So what do you think? Is Ricciardo the right man for Red Bull?

As a Formula One fan I would love to have seen Raikkonen give Vettel a run for his money and really pushed him, and I think many supporters of the sport would agree.

But in terms of doing the right thing for young driver development and setting themselves up for the long term, Red Bull has done the right thing in signing Ricciardo.

What do you think? Have your say below.

Topics: sport, motor-sports, formula-1, australia

First posted