Sky Sports' Craig Slater confirms that Jules Bianchi is only breathing with aid from the Mie Hospital in Suzuka. The Marussia F1 driver suffered a critical

Marussia driver Jules Bianchi remains in a critical condition in intensive care after emergency surgery on the ‘severe’ head injury he suffered during the Japanese GP.

The Frenchman underwent three hours of surgery late on Sunday night after being transported from the Suzuka circuit in an unconscious condition.

Contrary to some reports, he is not breathing unaided.

"We're not getting any official updates from the hospital but I understand that Jules is in a very critical condition, still fighting for his life, and I can clear up a couple of pieces of misinformation which have been picked up by the French media and a couple of outlets in the UK," Sky Sports News HQ's Craig Slater reported at 6am UK Time on Monday morning.

"I can confirm that Jules is not, unfortunately, breathing unaided. My understanding is that he is still relying on a respirator at this point to be able to breathe.

Sauber’s Adrian Sutil crashed at the same corner as Jules Bianchi and feels the race could have been stopped sooner.

"I can also confirm that he has not undergone a second surgical procedure. My understanding is that he went through one medical procedure at about 11pm Japanese time and he has been intensive care since then."

No further update on Bianchi's condition is expected until his parents arrive at the Mie University Hospital later on Monday.

"The family have had to fly from their home in the south of France via Paris and Dubai. They are due to touch down in Osaka round about 5pm local time (9am UK) and it should take them another hour and a half to make their way to the hospital where their son is currently being treated," Craig Slater explained.

"They will then be briefed by doctors and then maybe after that consultation it’s possible we might get a further update on Bianchi’s condition. We haven’t had that thus far because the Formula 1 authorities and the hospital have been very keen to make sure they have been able to communicate fully with the family before informing the media about what the situation is."

Marussia said they had no further information to add to the FIA statement released on Sunday evening, which read: "The CT scan shows that he has suffered a severe head injury and he is currently undergoing surgery. Following this he will be moved to intensive care where he will be monitored.

"Mie General Hospital will issue an update as soon as further information becomes available."

The Frenchman was injured after sliding off at Turn Seven of the Suzuka circuit where marshals were already recovering the crashed Sauber of Adrian Sutil with a tractor. Eyewitnesses reported that the out-of-control Marussia then struck the recovery vehicle.

The race was red-flagged, and brought to an early conclusion, once Race Control had been alerted to the severity of Bianchi's injuries.

The crash occurred on Lap 44 after rain had begun to fall steadily across the Suzuka circuit, with questions immediately asked about whether the Safety Car should have been deployed right after Sutil's accident.

"Everyone knows this is one of the most tricky corners and when it is getting late and the rain increases… let’s say when you have an accident there you should probably think about a Safety Car," Sutil told Sky Sports F1.

Thoughts in the paddock are with Marussia driver Jules Bianchi following the Japanese GP.

“The yellow flags were out after I aquaplaned at the corner as the rain got more and more and one lap later with waved yellow flags Jules came around and had the same spin there. It was more or less the same crash, but just the outcome was a bit different. The recovery car came out to rescue my car and then it all happened.”

Williams driver Felipe Massa, who travelled to the hospital immediately after Sunday's race in the company of Ferrari team boss Marco Mattiacci, was outspoken in his criticism of Race Control for not deploying the Safety Car earlier.

"In my opinion, we started the race too early and we ended it too late," he stated. "I was screaming on the radio five laps before the Safety Car that there was too much water on the track. It was dangerous."

Bianchi is a graduate of Ferrari's Young Driver Programme and scored Marussia's first points in F1 at the Monaco GP in May.

The FIA update in full - 3pm UK Time, Sunday.

"On lap 42, Adrian Sutil lost control of his car, spun and hit the tyre barrier on the outside of Turn Seven. The marshals displayed double-waved yellow flags before the corner to warn drivers of the incident. A recovery vehicle was despatched in order to lift the car and to take it to a place of safety behind the guard rail.

“While this was being done, the driver of car 17, Jules Bianchi, lost control of his car, travelled across the run-off area and hit the back of the tractor. Once the marshals reported that the driver was injured medical teams were despatched and the Safety Car was deployed. These were followed by a extraction team and an ambulance. The driver was removed from the car, taken to the circuit medical centre and then by ambulance to Mie General Hospital.



"The CT scan shows that he has suffered a severe head injury and is currently undergoing surgery. Following this he will be moved to intensive care where he will be monitored. Mie General Hospital will issue an update as soon as further information becomes available."