Renault have unveiled images and details of their 2014 Formula One engine. The 1.6-litre V6 turbocharged unit has been named Energy F1-2014 in deference to the added importance of energy recovery systems (ERS) in next year’s Formula One regulations.



In 2014 the current 2.4-litre V8 engines, which rev to a maximum of 18,000rpm, will be replaced by 1.6-litre V6 turbocharged power units revving to a maximum of 15,000rpm.



The new engines will produce around 600bhp, but that will be complemented by a powerful ERS producing around an additional 160bhp and dramatically increasing powertrain efficiency by harvesting energy dissipated as heat in the exhaust or brakes.



Whilst the maximum power of the new units will exceed the output of current V8 engines, fuel efficiency will be radically improved with Renault predicting that the new powerplants will use 35 percent less fuel than their predecessors - important as fuel will be limited to 100kg per race next season.



As expected, the sound of the new unit will also be different to its predecessor as Rob White, Renault’s deputy managing director (technical), explained: “The engines remain high-revving, ultra-high output competition engines. Fundamentally the engine noise will still be loud.



"It will wake you from sleep, and circuit neighbours will still complain. The engine noise is just a turbocharged noise rather than a normally-aspirated noise: you can just hear the turbo when the driver lifts off the throttle and the engine speed drops.



"I am sure some people will be nostalgic for the sound of engines from previous eras, including the preceding V8, but the sound of the new generation power units is just different. It’s like asking whether you like Motorhead or AC/DC. Ultimately it is a matter of personal taste. Both in concert are still pretty loud."



Renault will continue their world championship-winning relationship with Red Bull next season and the French firm will also replace Ferrari as engine suppliers to Toro Rosso. The two other teams Renault currently supply, Lotus and Caterham, have yet to officially confirm their 2014 engine plans.



For tickets and travel to 2013 FORMULA 1 races, click here.

For FORMULA 1 and F1 team merchandise, click here.