Formula One: Mark Webber to retire at end of season

Updated

Australia's Mark Webber has announced he will retire from Formula One racing at the end of the season.

The 36-year-old will leave the Red Bull racing team and continue his driving career with Porsche's new sports car program.

Webber's record: Races (started) 203 Wins 9 Poles 11 Podiums 36 Fastest laps 15

Webber made his Formula One debut at the Australian Grand Prix in 2002 and has since won nine grands prix and posted 36 podium finishes.

The Queanbeyan native also twice finished third in the world driver championship in 2010 and 2011.

Webber has signed a lengthy deal with Porsche and will compete in the Le Mans 24 Hours race.

"I'm very much looking forward to this new challenge after my time in Formula One," Webber said in statement.

"Porsche will undoubtedly set itself very high goals. I can hardly wait to pilot one of the fastest sports cars in the world."

In a separate statement, Red Bull thanked Webber for his extensive contribution in his seven years with the team and their three successive constructors' crowns.

"I am sure Mark thought long and hard before making what has no doubt been a very difficult decision," said principal Christian Horner, who co-owns a GP3 team with Webber and is close to the Australian.

"His achievements in Formula One are extensive and I am sure he will continue to push hard and build on that record until the end of the season," added the Briton.

"We support Mark's decision, he has been an excellent addition to the team since joining us in 2007 and we wish him all the best in the next stages of his career."

Webber is currently sitting in fifth place on the world driver championship standings.

Possible replacement

Lotus driver Kimi Raikkonen, the 2007 world champion, is favourite to take over from Webber at Red Bull.

Webber had spells at Minardi, Jaguar and Williams, before joining Red Bull for the 2007 season.

Sorry, this video has expired Video: Webber looking forward to new challenge (ABC News)

He had a testy relationship with the team of late as he felt he was not offered the same level of support as team-mate Sebastian Vettel.

The tension between the pair hit a peak at this season's Malaysian Grand Prix when the German ignored team orders not to overtake Webber to win the race.

Vettel subsequently apologised, but fell short of saying he would not repeat the move.

As well as Le Mans, which he has raced twice previously, Webber will compete in World Endurance Championship.

"I'm very pleased to have secured Mark Webber for our LMP1 project as one of the best and most successful Formula 1 pilots of our time," Porsche board member for research and development Wolfgang Hatz said.

"Mark is without doubt one of the world's best race drivers, he has experience at the Le Mans 24 hour race and on top of that he's been a Porsche enthusiast for many years."

Reuters/ABC

Topics: motor-sports, formula-1, sport, united-kingdom, england

First posted