World Motor Sport Council

A meeting of the FIA World Motor Sport Council (WMSC) took place today (27 September) in Dubrovnik, Croatia.

The FIA President, Jean Todt, opened the meeting by thanking Matko Bolanca, President of the Croatian Car & Karting Federation (CCKF), and Zrinko Gregurek, Secretary General of the CCKF and WMSC member, for their hospitality and for hosting the FIA family.

The following decisions were taken by the World Motor Sport Council:

FIA FORMULA ONE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP

As confirmed earlier today by the FIA and the Formula 1 Group, the framework for the implementation of the 2013 Concorde Agreement has now come into force. This agreement provides the FIA with significantly improved financial means to pursue its regulatory missions and to reflect the enhanced role undertaken by the FIA in motor sport. The parties have agreed a strong and stable sporting governance framework which includes the Formula 1 Group, the FIA and the participating teams. The agreement lays down solid foundations for the further development of the FIA Formula One World Championship.

The members of the WMSC congratulated the FIA President for the successful and favourable conclusion to the negotiations. The members also accepted his proposal to create a new task force, after the FIA Presidential Election, charged with proposing the allocation of the additional financial resources for the FIA and its membership.

One of the noteworthy aspects of the new 2013 Concorde Agreement is the new tender procedure for appointing single suppliers in the tyre and fuel categories, for the FIA F1 World Championship.

In this new process, the FIA will be confirmed as the body in charge of conducting the tender process. The Commercial Rights Holder will be entitled to run the commercial negotiations with potential suppliers, with a view to the selected single supplier being officially appointed by the WMSC.

In order to cover the transition period and considering the contracts already settled by FOM and the Teams with Pirelli, the WMSC today confirmed that Pirelli may continue to supply tyres to competitors in the FIA F1 World Championship, subject to the requisite technical and safety standards of the FIA being met.

The 2014 FIA Formula One World Championship calendar is confirmed as follows:

16 March Grand Prix of Australia 30 March Grand Prix of Malaysia 06 April Grand Prix of Bahrain 20 April Grand Prix of China 27 April Grand Prix of Korea (provisional) 11 May Grand Prix of Spain 25 May Grand Prix of Monaco 01 June Grand Prix of America, New Jersey (provisional*) 08 June Grand Prix of Canada 22 June Grand Prix of Austria 06 July Grand Prix of Great Britain 20 July Grand Prix of Germany (Hockenheim) 27 July Grand Prix of Hungary 24 August Grand Prix of Belgium 07 September Grand Prix of Italy 21 September Grand Prix of Singapore 05 October Grand Prix of Russia (Sochi) 12 October Grand Prix of Japan 26 October Grand Prix of Abu Dhabi 09 November Grand Prix of USA (Austin) 16 November Grand Prix of Mexico (provisional*) 30 November Grand Prix of Brazil

* Subject to the circuit approval





FIA WORLD RALLY CHAMPIONSHIP AND RALLYING

The 2014 FIA World Rally Championship calendar is confirmed as follows:

19 January Rallye Monte Carlo 09 February Rally Sweden 09 March Rally Mexico 06 April Rally de Portugal 11 May Rally Argentina 01 June Rally d'Italia 29 June Rally Poland (multi-country event) 03 August Rally Finland 24 August Rallye Deutschland 14 September Rally Australia 05 October Rallye de France 26 October Rally de España 16 November Rally of Great Britain

Note: The finish date given is the Sunday of the rally weekend. Itineraries are however subject to final confirmation by event organisers.

It is clarified that the hand-cutting of tyres is forbidden in the events of the FIA European Rally Cup, as well as the FIA European Rally Championship.

The 2014 FIA European Rally Championship calendar will be proposed to the WMSC at a later date.



FIA WORLD CUP FOR CROSS COUNTRY RALLIES

The 2014 FIA World Cup for Cross Country Rallies calendar is confirmed as follows:

16 February Baja Russia - Northern Forest 16 March Baja Italia 10 April Abu Dhabi Desert Challenge 25 April Sealine Cross Country Rally 25 May Pharaons Rally 20 July Baja España Aragon 17 August Hungarian Baja 31 August Baja Poland 27 September Rallye OiLibya du Maroc* 01 November 27th Baja Portalegre 500

* Subject to the 2013 observation report





FIA WORLD ENDURANCE CHAMPIONSHIP

In order to increase competitiveness, from 2014 the title of FIA World Endurance Manufacturers’ Champion will be awarded to the manufacturer scoring the greatest number of points with two cars (three cars if under Article 16.A) in the general classification.

The 2014 Sporting Regulations will be adjusted in order to take into consideration the new LMP1 Technical Regulations which will be implemented next season, taking into consideration the new distinction between the light category cars for privateers only (LMP-L) and the Hybrid category cars for both manufacturers and privateers (LMP-H), and the allocation of energy.





FIA FORMULA 4

An updated framework for the 2014 Sporting Regulations was agreed, with an emphasis on safety and ensuring that races are held on circuits holding a valid licence of Grade 4, minimum.

The Technical Regulations - designed to appeal to the widest range of stakeholders - were approved, in addition to the introduction of Homologation Regulations to limit costs related to engines, chassis and major consumption parts.





FIA FORMULA E CHAMPIONSHIP

The 2014/2015 FIA Formula E Championship calendar is confirmed as follows:

20 September 2014 Beijing, China* 18 October 2014 Putrajaya, Malaysia 8 November 2014 Hong Kong 13 December 2014 Punta del Este, Uruguay 10 January 2015 Buenos Aires, Argentina 14 February 2015 Los Angeles, USA 18 April 2015 Miami, USA 9 May 2015 Monte Carlo, Monaco* 30 May 2015 Berlin, Germany 27 June 2015 London, UK

All events remain subject to FIA Track Homologation

* Subject to ASN approval





HISTORIC MOTOR SPORT

In order to increase the attraction of FIA European Historic Sporting Rally Championship events, from 2014 a further class for Group A cars in Category 4 has been added to distinguish between cars under and over 2 litres.



To broaden the range of eligible cars in the FIA Historic Hill Climb Championship, two specific classes within Category 4 will be introduced from 2014. Dedicated to ‘Sport Nazionale’ cars, D6 will be specific to cars under 2500cc and D7 for those under 3000cc. Similarly, single-seater and two-seater racing cars from the 1983-1990 period will become eligible for Category 5, divided into two classes for under 1600cc (E4) and under 2000 cc (E5).





FIA WORLD RALLYCROSS CHAMPIONSHIP

Following the proposal by the Promoter of the FIA European Rallycross Championship, the WMSC has approved the creation of a new FIA World Rallycross Championship from 2014, on the condition the calendar is based on a total of 11 or 12 events, with nine or 10 European events plus one event in Asia or Africa and one event on the American continent.

The formats of the FIA European Rallycross Championships for the support categories, TouringCar and Super1600, are maintained, with the calendar comprising the European events in the World Championship. The format of the European Championship for the flagship category, SuperCar, will be adapted and concentrated over five of the 10 European events in the World Championship. This will also have a specific classification for non-permanent drivers not entered in the entirety of the World Championship.





FIA INTERNATIONAL HILL-CLIMB CUP

As a result of a review of the development and restructuring of the FIA’s activities in hill climb, from 2014 the FIA International Hill Climb Challenge and the FIA European Hill Climb Cup will be merged into one competition known as the FIA International Hill Climb Cup (IHCC). As a consequence, the regulations concerning the Groups of vehicles will be amended along with the associated awards.



GT

The principles of the convergence between the current GTE cars (Le Mans) and the FIA GT3 have been commonly defined by the FIA and ACO and agreed by all the GT manufacturers. The aim is to present the new GT Technical Regulations, based on new categories (GT+ and GT), at the WMSC in June 2014 for implementation in 2016.



DRIVERS’ COMMISSION

In order to ensure the voice of drivers is heard during the FIA decision process, the WMSC agreed that a driver representative be designated in the various FIA Commissions and Working Groups. In addition, and in co-operation with the FIA Circuits Department, the Commission has designated a member to work with various bodies in relation to circuit safety, in particular.

President of the Drivers’ Commission, Emerson Fittipaldi, also advised the WMSC that the Minister of the Cities of Brazil, along with an Embassy delegation, participated in their meeting and presented the various initiatives implemented in this region to reinforce road safety while involving motor sport.





WOMEN IN MOTOR SPORT

The Commission continues to focus its activities on promoting the role of women in all areas of motor sport and, in addition to the work it is undertaking with the FIA Action for Road Safety campaign, is broadening its remit to encourage more women to become engineers, volunteers and officials.



IOC RECOGNITION

The FIA President confirmed to the members of the WMSC that the Executive Board of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) has granted full recognition to the FIA in accordance with the Rules of the Olympic Charter.



INTERNATIONAL SPORTING CODE

Following a proposal from a dedicated review commission, and after consultation with the ASNs, the WMSC unanimously approved a complete revision of the International Sporting Code. This version will come into effect on 1 January 2014.



MOTOR SPORT TASK FORCE

The Motor Sport Task Force will nominate its members after the FIA Presidential Election.



ASN DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE

The FIA President underlined the importance of the work of the ASN Development Task Force, reinforcing the need to help ASNs grow the sport at grass roots level round the world.