Formula One driver Jules Bianchi in critical condition after horror Japanese Grand Prix crash

Updated

French Formula One driver Jules Bianchi has undergone surgery for a serious injury to his head after a horrific crash in the latter stages of the Japanese Grand Prix.

Bianchi, of the Marussia Formula One team, lost control of his car with nine laps of the race to go and crashed into a large crane put in place to assist the car of Adrian Sutil, who had crashed at the same turn earlier.

It is thought the conditions played a part in Bianchi's accident, with heavy rain and wind wreaking havoc throughout the race.

The race was restarted behind a safety car twice before Bianchi's crash.

Race officials were immediately concerned for Bianchi's welfare, and have since confirmed he is in a critical condition in intensive care after surgery.

"The driver is not conscious. He has been sent to the hospital by ambulance because the helicopter cannot go in these conditions," Federation Internationale de I'Automobile press officer Matteo Bonciani said.

"Further updates will follow. For the moment we cannot say anything. We will keep you updated as fast as we can."

Sutil was the closest driver to the crash and was shaken by the incident.

"I had a spin and ended up in the wall," he said.

"I stood up and they tried to rescue the car. Jules was in the same area and lost the car. I have no more information. We are all aware of the situation. Hopefully he is in good hands."

Mercedes' Lewis Hamilton was the eventual winner of the race, but emphasised Bianchi's wellbeing was his highest priority.

"It's obviously a real anti-climax to hear that one of our fellow colleagues is seriously injured so that's really the main worry," Hamilton said.

"You could see some commotion and the car was really badly damaged on the right. We just hope he's OK."

Hamilton's team-mate Nico Rosberg, who finished second, said Bianchi's condition seemed "very, very serious".

"I'm not thinking about the race, I'm thinking about my colleague," Rosberg said.

"I'm hoping for the best."

Topics: formula-1, motor-sports, sport, japan

First posted