CY Leung: Occupy Hong Kong Movement 'Jeopardized' Rule of Law





CY Leung Occupy Hong Kong Movement 'Jeopardized' Rule of Law, hong kong chief executive, universal suffrage







Hong Kong Chief Executive CY Leung said that last year's Occupy Movement not only didn't help in the cause for universal suffrage, but it "jeopardized the rule of law as well as our society's core values."



Like Us on Facebook

Advertisement

Leung made the comment Thursday during a question and answer session in the Legislative Council, reports China Radio International (CRI). He insisted that it was unrealistic to restart the constitutional reform process, and says lawmakers in Hong Kong need to understand that.



"I am calling for all lawmakers to put aside their own views and reach consensus to realize the goal to elect our next chief executive through universal suffrage in a pragmatic and lawful manner," Leung said.



Any changes to the voting process in Hong Kong requires at least two-thirds of all lawmakers to pass the framework laid down by the Central Government, reports CRI. Despite Leung's pleas, several lawmakers in Hong Kong reportedly plan to boycott the vote, or oppose it all together.



Leung also said he hopes to appeal to the youth of Hong Kong by having face-to-face talks with them, reported CRI.



"Young people especially, when they are in college, should have the space for thinking and communication, needless to say, their freedom of speech," said Leung. "But they should also bear in mind that there is 'right and wrong' in terms of their personal morality, social ethics as well as national identity."



Leung added that the Hong Kong Government is looking to boost youth participation in other areas, including political development, housing and welfare.



The Occupy Hong Kong movement began in September after the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) announced that it wouldn't allow civil nominations.



The NPCSC said that a 1,200-member nominating committee, the composition of which remains subject to a second round of consultation, would elect two to three electoral candidates with more than half of the votes before the general public could vote on them.



As a result, protests began outside the Hong Kong Government headquarters, and members of what would eventually be called the Umbrella Movement occupied several major city intersections



Advertisement

Advertisement

©2018 Chinatopix All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission