Police in Hong Kong have arrested four men after a small group of pro-democracy protesters wielded metal barricades and concrete slabs as they tried to force their way into the city’s legislature.

The clashes came hours after authorities used court orders to clear a small stretch of the main protest zone at Admiralty, where the government buildings are based.

Protest leaders and pro-democracy lawmakers condemned the attempt to break into the legislative council, stressing that the movement – now in its seventh week – has been peaceful.

Protesters in masks, goggles and hard hats used metal barricades and concrete slabs to smash glass doors before officers armed with pepper spray, batons and riot shields pushed them back. Police said the group injured three officers as it repeatedly charged the cordon.

“We want to escalate our protest,” one masked figure told local station TVB. “The government has not responded to the demands of protesters and residents.”

Pro-democracy legislature member Fernando Cheung tried to intervene but was pushed away by those trying to break in. “This is a very, very isolated incident. I think it’s very unfortunate and this is something we don’t want to see happen because the movement so far has been very peaceful,” he told Reuters.

Lester Shum, from the Hong Kong Federation of Students, told Agence France-Presse: “We call on occupiers to stick firm to peaceful and non-violent principles and be a responsible participant of the umbrella movement.”

In a statement, Occupy Central With Love and Peace – which originally proposed the civil disobedience movement – said: “The umbrella movement emphasises non-violent civil disobedience and the bearing of criminal responsibility. The action [this morning] … went against the concepts of civil disobedience.”

It said its legal team would not offer support to those involved in violence.

But while Occupy Central and student groups initiated the protests in late September, the “umbrella movement” has taken on a momentum of its own. Many of those participating say they do not identify with those groups and are acting independently.

Those involved in the attempt to storm the legislature appear to have organised online. A regular session of the chamber was cancelled on Wednesday and visitor tours of the complex were suspended, the government announced.

“Police strongly condemn such acts by the protesters, which disrupted public order,” police said.

At the height of the protest movement more than 100,000 took to the streets in support. That is now down to hundreds and opinion polls show that public sympathy has ebbed as the protests drag on.

Occupiers have called for the resignation of Hong Kong’s chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, and open nominations for his successor. Beijing has argued that offering universal suffrage for the 2017 election will be a huge step forward but critics say it is reneging on its promise by tightly controlling the selection of candidates.

Hong Kong enjoys considerable autonomy under the “one country, two systems” framework. But there is growing concern that Beijing is eroding its liberties and unhappiness about inequality in the region.

On Tuesday, bailiffs and police watched as workers cleared barricades from a section of the main protest zone at Admiralty, around the Citic Tower, leaving the vast bulk of the area unaffected.

Thousands of police are said to be on standby so another small section of one of the secondary protest zones, at Mong Kok, can be cleared; clashes have broken out repeatedly there.