Despite dwindling numbers and uncertainty about what to do next, the pro-democracy demonstrators who have paralysed parts of Hong Kong for the past month are not ready to go home yet. Keri Phillips explains the background to the massive public protests.

Hong Kong pro-democracy campaigners have once again hit the streets en masse to mark one month of protests against the Chinese government's decision to only allow its hand-picked candidates to run for election as the territory’s top official in 2017. The roots of the demonstrations go back much further, though.

Hong Kong was under British rule for over 150 years. As the end of Britain's lease over the crown colony came into view in the late 1970s, the governments of Margaret Thatcher and Deng Xiaoping reached a formal agreement to hand back the territory to China in 1997.

The prices of houses have gone up so much, the cost of living has gone up so much, and all the society has become less and less cultured because of the “uncouth” mainlanders coming into Hong Kong. So it is a social response more than anything else. Dr Sow Keat Tok, University of Melbourne

Formally known as the Joint Declaration of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the People's Republic of China on the Question of Hong Kong, it was signed by the prime ministers of both countries in December 1984.

The Sino-British Joint Declaration proposed a principle of 'one country, two systems', which would allow the people of Hong Kong a high degree of autonomy, enshrining for the next 50 years the same legal, social and economic systems that existed under British rule.

The document also promised the people of Hong Kong something which they had never enjoyed as a British colony; universal suffrage. Under British rule, executive power was concentrated in the hands of the governor, appointed by Westminster. A Legislative Council had been set up during the 19th century but its members were effectively chosen by the British government.

During Hong Kong's final years as a British colony, the Legislative Council became an unusual hybrid, with representatives for some seats elected directly, but others—in functional constituency seats—elected by industry and professional elites. Functional constituencies would include, for example, the bankers association, but only the senior bankers—the owners of the bank—would have a vote.

Professor Steve Tsang, from the China Policy Institute at the University of Nottingham, says that the political changes negotiated between China and the UK during the dying days of colonial rule had to satisfy those on both sides.

‘For the British parliament to agree to hand over several million British subjects to a communist state, there would have to be some kind of arrangements that would be tolerable to the British Parliament, otherwise it would be rather difficult to sell. And that's why in the Sino-British Joint Declaration there were clear indications that Hong Kong would move towards some kind of changes.’

‘At the same time, there was also a clear need that the Sino-British agreement would have to be acceptable to Beijing, therefore there could not have been clear spelling out specifically [of] what democratic changes need to be introduced in Hong Kong before the actual handover.’

‘So there was a degree of calculated ambiguity being built into the agreement, with the British side believing that they would be able to develop Hong Kong much further in the direction of democratic changes before the handover in 1997, and with the Chinese never really agreeing to something like that, though they accepted some changes might be necessary.’

Related: Behind the protests in Ferguson, Missouri

What is known as Hong Kong Basic Law was drafted during the years leading up to the return of Hong Kong to China. Built on the Sino-British Joint Declaration, it guaranteed the continuation of the capitalist system and the right of the people of Hong Kong to things such as free speech and freedom of association.

Although no date was set, it also guaranteed that the selection of the chief executive (who essentially replaced the British governor) would ultimately be by means of universal suffrage.

The word ‘democracy’ did not, however, appear in the document and pro-democracy groups and parties, which had begun to form in the 1980s and 1990s, held a mass rally in front of Hong Kong’s main government administration centre on the day the territory became once more part of China.

This was the first of many street protests, which became so numerous after the hand-over in 1997 that The New York Times dubbed Hong Kong the demonstration capital of the world.

The largest demonstration occurred in July 2003, when 500,000 people marched against controversial security legislation associated with Article 23 of Hong Kong’s Basic Law which, it was feared, would restrict political rights. The bill was shelved indefinitely.

‘Following that there has since been a tradition where every July 1, on the anniversary of the establishment of Hong Kong SAR, there have been protests and demonstrations on the streets,’ says Dr Sarah Mak from the department of government and Asian Studies at Bowdoin College.

‘The demonstrations, especially in the past few years, have been growing in number and they include interest groups that really span the political spectrum. So you have pro-democracy advocates, you have villagers who are protesting development plans in their village. You also have animal rights activists, minority group activists.’

‘It has come to the point where these July 1 marches are really, in many ways, a hodgepodge of different issues, but the one thing that unites everything seems to be the people's discontent with how the government is handling these issues.’

‘Another key moment in terms of social movements and demonstrations in Hong Kong would be something that happened in 2012, when the government was trying to introduce a change in the education curriculum, in which all schools would have to teach what was known as a patriotic education class, something to that effect’.

‘This led to a group of high school students forming the group Scholarism and they actually successfully managed to have that national education plan shelved. And I should also note that one of the key members of that group Scholarism is Joshua Wong, who has been very active in the protests that we see today in Hong Kong.’

Despite a voting system that gives Beijing control through both its appointed chief executive and a gerrymandered Legislative Council, political activism of the most direct kind—street protest—has allowed a kind of political voice to the people of Hong Kong.

Just how much change has China been able to impose on the former British colony over the past 17 years?

‘On the surface it seems like Hong Kong has changed very little,’ says Dr Sow Keat Tok, a China expert in the Asia Institute at the University of Melbourne.

‘But that said, over the years you are seeing very importantly, an increasing number of mainlanders moving to Hong Kong, either as day tourists or actually moving their residency over in Hong Kong to invest in properties and take up residency there.’

‘You can imagine the changes, the enormous social impact and pressures that this kind of flow of population actually causes Hong Kong society. And indeed, when I visited Hong Kong in April this year just before the whole thing became really bad, the feedback I received was that it's not so much a democratic demand, it was very much Hong Kongers felt that their livelihood has been affected by the mainland Chinese coming in, and they feel that things have changed a lot.’

‘The prices of houses have gone up so much, the cost of living has gone up so much, and all the society has become less and less cultured because of the “uncouth” mainlanders coming into Hong Kong, things like that. So it is a social response more than anything else.’

‘Politically, Beijing has intervened in Hong Kong only through what we call the law interpretation. There is no obvious intervention in Hong Kong, even though tension was high back in 2003, for example.’

‘What China did was to do what the Basic Law stipulates, so they have a Basic Law interpretation committee sitting in Beijing, and they will interpret the Basic Law and they will issue decrees and say that, okay, based on our interpretation of Basic Law this is what we are going to do for Hong Kong.’

‘A lot of the changes have been done under the table through the chief executive. So every year the chief executive will have to report to Beijing, and then Beijing, in the discussion, will give him directions and instructions of how they like Hong Kong's development or what kind of policy should be taking precedence over the others. But there has been very, very little obvious intervention whatsoever.’

Related: Saudi Arabia and Islamic extremism

It was the announcement of one such decision in August this year that sparked the month-long demonstrations that have brought tens of thousands onto the streets of Hong Kong in the so-called ‘umbrella movement’.

Professor Joseph Cheng, a political scientist at the City University of Hong Kong, has been a pro-democracy activist for more than 30 years and is the convenor of the Alliance for True Democracy, the umbrella group for the current Occupy Central campaign.

‘In 2007, the Chinese authorities promised Hong Kong people that we may elect our chief executive by universal suffrage in 2017, and all seats of the legislature by universal suffrage in 2020,’ he explains.

‘However, at the end of August, the standing committee of the National People's Congress announced a decision that set the framework for the election of the chief executive in 2017. This framework leaves no room for a democratic electoral system.’

‘According to the framework the pro-Beijing elites will elect a nomination committee which will then control the entire list of candidates for the chief executive election. All the time the Chinese authorities use the excuse of a national security considerations to rationalise, to justify a political screening process to ensure that the candidates are truly patriotic, that they love Hong Kong, love China and so on.’

‘When the pro-democracy groups ask what are the criteria, then the answer is the nomination committee will decide. Hence Hong Kong people feel that there is no meaningful choice for the people, there is no genuine competition in the election. And this decision triggered the Occupy Central campaign.’

Last week, in an extraordinary debate broadcast live on television, student leaders pressed senior government representatives from the territory for a timetable for democratic reform.

In the end neither side gave any significant ground, although the government offered to send a report to the Chinese government reflecting the protesters’ views and to set up a platform for debating future constitutional changes. Protest leaders, after initially rejecting the proposal, then decided to hold a ballot, which in turn was abruptly cancelled.

Although street occupations continue in three areas of the city, student leaders and organisers of Occupy Central With Love and Peace, who had jointly planned what’s become known as the umbrella movement, seem uncertain over what to do next.

Hong Kong's umbrella movement Sunday 26 October 2014 Find out more about the unrest at Hong Kong by listening to the full episode of Rear Vision. More This [series episode segment] has image, and transcript

Long-time activists like Joseph Cheng, one of the organisers of Occupy Central, think that China must ultimately accept the pro-democracy movement, Hong Kong's persistent agitation has huge implications for the government in Beijing.

‘We have been telling the Chinese authorities that it is not difficult at all to implement democracy in Hong Kong,’ says Cheng. ‘Hong Kong people are moderate, they are pragmatic, they don't want to confront Beijing, they fully accept Chinese sovereignty over Hong Kong.’

‘All they want is to be left alone to enjoy a high degree of autonomy. And we all understand that our economy is highly dependent on that of mainland China, our water comes from mainland China, and certainly we have no intention to make trouble with Beijing.’

‘And any chief executive, even a chief executive from the pro-democracy camp, must maintain a good relationship with Beijing, otherwise the chief executive simply cannot survive. People will not support him or her.’

‘In regard to the demonstration’s effect in China, certainly the Chinese authorities are very concerned, but I think people all over the world hope to see democratic reforms in China, and it will be best for the Chinese leadership when they enjoy a high level of trust from the people, when China's economy is doing very well, to initiate political reforms and not to wait until political reforms are forced upon authorities by the grievances of the people. But apparently these arguments do not go well with a Marxist Leninist regime which intends to maintain its monopoly of political power at this stage.’

Rear Vision puts contemporary events in their historical context, answering the question, ‘How did it come to this?’



