Update: Hong Kong authorities have since taken the banner down



After occupying Hong Kong’s major roads, pro-democracy protesters have occupied a landmark dear to the hearts of the city’s residents.

On Thursday, protesters unfurled a yellow banner saying “I want real universal suffrage” on a mountain known as Lion Rock. In a YouTube video, a group called “Hong Kong Spidies” claimed responsibility for the act. The video showed a man dressed in a Spiderman costume, who said that a group of “ordinary Hong Kong citizens” decided to support the protesters, who represent the true “Lion Rock spirit” of Hong Kong people. Behind him was a yellow banner saying “#UmbrellaMovement,” a reference to the fact that many Hong Kong protesters have used umbrellas to protect themselves from police pepper spray.

“We think the spirit of Lion Rock isn’t just about money…the people fighting for universal suffrage all over Hong Kong have shown great perseverance in their fight against injustice and perseverance in the face of difficulties. This is the true Lion Rock spirit,” said the man in the video.

Hong Kong protesters have been occupying major parts of Hong Kong for almost one month as they fight for universal suffrage in the 2017 chief executive elections. Beijing has ruled that candidates running for the election must be pre-screened.

Lion Rock, which sits between Kowloon and the New Territories, was named for its resemblance to a lion. In Hong Kong, the rock is now synonymous with the tenacity and can-do attitude associated with Hong Kong people. The term was popularized by a TV show called “Below the Lion Rock,” which first aired in the 1970s and explored the lives of working-class people in Hong Kong, particularly those who had fled mainland China to settle in the former British colony. The show depicted the lives of people living around Lion Rock in areas such as Wong Tai Sin and Kowloon City, known for their slums and dense public housing developments.

The show’s theme song, sung by Cantopop legend Roman Tam, who died in 2002, is known by Hong Kongers all over the world, and is one of the songs sung by protesters participating in Hong Kong’s so-called Umbrella Movement.

The government has also referenced the song in its own promotion campaigns. Last year, the government launched a campaign called “Hong Kong: Our Home,” lifting from Mr. Tam’s song.

“Below the Lion Rock” is closely associated with the Hong Kong spirit of perseverance, mutual help and care, while the new twist celebrates Hong Kong’s ability to move forward, innovate and grow without losing sight of its core values,” said a government press release at the time.

The campaign was launched by chief secretary Carrie Lam, the city’s number-two official who faced off against student protesters in a televised discussion on Tuesday.

Police spokesman Steve Hui -- a minor celebrity in his own right – said at a press conference on Thursday that the police respects citizens’ “freedom of expression and assembly” but added that the hanging of the banner may be a violation of the Country Parks Ordinance, without further elaboration. He said the police are making further inquiries into the case.

As of Thursday evening, the banner was still hanging, and has already spawned a new set of memes:

– Isabella Steger