The latest protester to take to the streets of Hong Kong stands 10 feet tall and clenches a yellow umbrella in his right fist. With his arm raised, he cuts such a defiant and resolute figure that Tina So, a local artist, felt inspired to draw his portrait.

“He truly represents the spirit and the sentiment of the students,” she said, while sketching furiously. “He is standing tall, with his chest straight, and holding up the umbrella to protect the city.”

This latest addition to the pro-democracy movement is a statue made solely of blocks of wood. An anonymous artist, known only as “Milk”, wheeled his creation into the main protest camp in the Admiralty area shortly before midnight, cheered by thousands of demonstrators.

“Umbrella Man”, as the statue has become known, tells the story of Hong Kong’s protests. His face is white - like the faces of those activists who were tear-gassed and pepper-sprayed by police ten days ago. His yellow umbrella was the first symbol of the pro-democracy movement.

“He is saying to me ‘even though I have been sprayed with pepper in my face, I am still here and I am protecting you’,” said Ms So. “This statue is a remarkable manifestation of the artist’s inner spirit.”

Whatever the outcome of the protests, they have triggered a sudden boom in public art. “Umbrella Man” faces towards the “Lennon Wall”, which displays a multitude of brightly coloured post-it notes bearing messages of good cheer or defiance.

“Peace is the greatest weapon”, reads one. “Will you stand up and take your chance?” asks another.

All around, the once spotless and tightly guarded Central Government Office has been festooned with irreverent banners.

In the spirit of the “Lennon Wall”, one displays a portrait of the Beatle with his round glasses and his most famous words: “You may say I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only one!”

Others heap scorn on C.Y. Leung, the chief executive of Hong Kong, who is portrayed variously as a wolf or a monster.

Yet the protests have dwindled now and the movement’s leaders have begun talking to Mr Leung’s officials. Even the headiest optimist doubts whether full democracy can really be achieved, at least in the short term.

Like the works of art that surround them, Hong Kong’s protests have taken on a dreamlike quality. But the demonstrators believe that all their efforts have been worthwhile nonetheless.

“I think most of us know we won’t win this time,” said Joyce Tang, a 21-year-old student. “But it’s necessary to come on to the streets to make our point. This is a long term struggle and we aren’t going away.”