When 45-year-old Ray Ng Siu-wai saw how quickly the Hong Kong government took down a banner calling for real universal suffrage that was hung on the city’s famous Lion Rock hill, he decided to go one further than making his own banner.

Ng made his own Lion Rock.

The professional model maker worked on a 1:144 scale replica of the iconic hill for a week, constructing his version with styrofoam, plaster, miniature trees and paint. He even included tiny protesters holding yellow umbrellas, which he handcrafted from putty and painted.

The work, which he calls “the Spirit of Lion Rock”, drew a crowd almost as soon as it was unveiled in Admiralty.

A group of climbers hung a giant pro-democracy banner on Lion Rock last month, and copycat banners also emerged in prominent spots around the city. All were taken down by authorities, citing safety concerns.

Smaller versions have popped up on college campuses, apartment windows and even on cardboard versions of President Xi Jinping at protest camps.

“I rushed the production on [the model] because I wanted it to be relevant. Coincidentally I finished after all the banners on Fei Ngo Shan and Tai Mo Shan were taken down,” Ng said.

He based his model on maps and pictures of Lion Rock that he found on Google. Ng also added an RX-78/2 Gundam, as he works with models of the popular anime series in his professional life.

“Some people took pictures, some people made paintings, but no one has made a replica of Lion Rock, so I decided to do what I do best.”

Many in the city associate the “Lion Rock spirit” with striving for a better life - as embodied in 1970s RTHK drama Under the Lion Rock and its title song.

Ng lives in Ma On Shan, far away from the protest area in Admiralty, but says he’s been a part of the protest since September 28, when he got tear-gassed. He says he trusts his fellow protesters to protect his work.

“If it only stands for a few days, then so be it. My work will live and die with the protest area. Everyone cares about this place.”

When asked what he would like the government to do, Ng pointed to the banner on his model.