Pro-democracy protesters cleared from Hong Kong streets last week are bracing for repercussions. Besides the risk of arrest and jail time, some may be barred from entering China, others to defer studies, and one 14-year-old faces a police move to separate him from his parents.

On Nov. 25, the 14-year-old was among about two dozen demonstrators arrested as bailiffs and police officers enforced a court injunction to clear blocked roads in the Mong Kok shopping district. After almost 24 hours in detention, the teen was brought in front of a juvenile court judge. He wasn’t charged with an offense, with police instead applying for a care or protection order.

The court filing alleges that the teenager’s parents failed to exercise proper guardianship, putting his health, development and welfare at risk. If the court grants the bid at a January hearing, the boy -- who cannot be named for legal reasons -- could be subjected to a curfew, counseling or even removed from his parents’ care altogether, according to Patricia Ho, a lawyer representing him.

“Nobody could believe that the case was brought forward: it’s completely out of order,” Ho said. “It’s a scare tactic, not just for the kid but for his parents -- they’re trying to pressurize the child from all sides.”

The demonstrations -- sparked by opposition to China’s decision to vet candidates for the city’s next chief executive election -- caused Hong Kong’s biggest political crisis since Beijing resumed sovereignty in 1997, dividing families, schools, and communities. While student leaders of the movement said they were exercising their right to protest, police and private companies turned to the courts to restore order.

Extreme Cases

The Hong Kong Police declined to comment as “legal proceedings of the case are in progress,” according to an e-mailed response to questions. The protection order is usually used in extreme cases of neglect, such as due to mental illness, a connection to child pornography, and cases of self-mutilation and abandonment, Ho said.

Protection orders are used for a child when “there doesn’t appear to be somebody exercising proper care over them: either the person who has nominal care is themselves the danger or there isn’t anybody,” said Ian Wingfield, a Hong Kong-based barrister with Tower Chambers that specializes in family law.

A care or protection order application also enables the court to investigate on the grounds of welfare rather than criminality, said Wingfield, the city’s former solicitor general, who wasn’t commenting specifically on the 14-year-old’s case.

‘Peer Pressure’

Juveniles “really shouldn’t be involved, they’re really too young to come to any judgment,” said Regina Ip, a member of the city’s cabinet and Hong Kong’s former secretary of security, referring to teen involvement in the protests. “I know that some juveniles have taken part because of peer pressure, but I think the parents -- the grown-ups around them -- should really explain to them all the consequences and implications for that.”

Ip declined to comment specifically on the case as she isn’t involved.

Police and protesters were injured during three months of sometimes violent clashes, with 221 demonstrators receiving police-arranged medical treatment, the department said in a Dec. 15 press release.

China Ban

Participants who occupied city streets fear wider repercussions. Three members of the Hong Kong Federation of Students -- one of the main student groups organizing the protests -- were told by airline personnel that they couldn’t board a plane to Beijing last month. Their visas to enter the mainland, renewable every 10 years and a birth right for Chinese Hong Kongers, were canceled by mainland authorities, federation Secretary General Alex Chow told reporters at Hong Kong International Airport on Nov. 15.

Joshua Wong, leader of another protest group called Scholarism, said in an interview he knows of five or six people who have been denied entry to China, even though it is unclear whether their visas were canceled.

Protest leader Chow has also chosen to defer his studies, as he was finding it difficult to cope with classes while leading the protest, he said in an October interview.

Several people have been arrested in recent weeks for making online appeals on Internet forums and social media websites for people to gather for protests and storm police positions. And, even before the protests, some bank advertisers had been told to boycott publisher Jimmy Lai’s Next Media Group, which has long supported the pro-democracy movement, according to the company’s spokesman Mark Simon.

Attack Escalation

“I could expect that the attack on academia, the media, and netizens will intensify greatly,” said Hung Ho-fung, an associate professor at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, who focuses on nationalism and the political economy in China and Hong Kong.

Inspired by Wong’s speech against a mooted pro-China curriculum for the city’s schools in 2012, the 14-year-old at the center of the care or protection order said in a series of interviews over recent months that he sees himself defending Hong Kong’s autonomy and people’s rights.

The teenager’s interest in politics piqued in 2012 when teachers wore black clothes to protest the Chinese national education proposal, which the government scrapped after mass street protests.

Upon his detention by the police on Nov. 25, the teen says he was taken aside in the police station and told by an officer that since he’s been involved in illegal activities, there was an application for him to be moved to a boys’ home where perhaps he could be controlled.

Protest Visits

The teen’s parents live in one of Hong Kong’s poorest areas. They were not granted separate legal representation at the hearing, Ho said. The couple declined to comment for the article through Ho.

The boy continued to attend school throughout the protests, he said. He sometimes stayed overnight at the sites in the initial few days after police fired tear gas to disperse protest crowds on Sept. 28, and made return visits to offer support as numbers waxed and waned from tens of thousands to a few hundred, though he returned home each night.

On December 2, after violent clashes outside government offices in Admiralty, the city’s leader, Chief Executive Leung Chun-ying, said students “should think about the consequences of joining the occupation, which is an illegal movement,” according to a government statement.

‘More Arrests’

More than 200 people had been identified for investigation over the civil disobedience movement, including people who clashed with officers during attempts to clear protest camps and people who had incited others to act illegally, the South China Morning Post reported, citing an unidentified source. As investigations continue, police may make more arrests including of “principal instigators,” the force’s commissioner Tsang Wai-hung said in the Dec. 15 statement.

With tens of thousands of photographs being taken of protesters by policemen, journalists and citizens alike, many had taken to wearing masks or scarves over their face -- especially when they’re at the front lines -- to protect themselves from future repercussions.

Police officers have been seen taking photos and videos of protesters in the past two months. In the early hours of Dec. 1, as police and protesters clashed in Admiralty, police announced on loudspeakers that certain protesters had had their photo taken, and that the police will find and prosecute them for throwing things at them.

Government “scare tactics” are not going to work in the long run, said Hung of Johns Hopkins University.

“They no longer see the government as legitimate and they have no future under the status quo any way,” he said. “They have nothing to lose.”