Photo

HONG KONG — Clashes between the police and protesters flared in a crowded shopping district of Hong Kong on Friday night, days after the police dismantled a pro-democracy camp there.

But each of the four nights since that clearance started, protesters have returned to the Mong Kok neighborhood on the north side of the city, which is crammed with shops, restaurants and bars. Many protesters said they were angry about police methods on top of their demand for the fully democratic election of Hong Kong’s leader.

“People came out because they’re angry with the police,” said Ben W. S. Lee, a 37-year-old teacher in the crowd. “I’ve lost all my trust in the police because they’ve used excessive force on Hong Kong people in the past few days.”

The protesters at first engaged in boisterous chanting, and many shouted that they were merely returning to shop in Mong Kok, as the head of the Hong Kong government, Leung Chun-ying, has urged people to do. But around midnight the mood turned tense, and a confrontation erupted after hundreds of demonstrators tried to burst through a police cordon on Argyle Street, which had been part of the cleared protest camp.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As the number of protesters in the standoff grew, police officers warned them to disperse. When that failed, officers squirted pepper spray at the front ranks of protesters, who tried to protect themselves with umbrellas, and then pushed into the crowd with batons, tossing aside umbrellas and dragging away some protesters. Some people were taken away by ambulances.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In the early hours of Saturday, groups of protesters scattered into nearby streets and continued testing the police by hurling insults, demanding the release of arrested people and crossing intersections with exaggerated slowness.