Ferguson police arrested several protesters on Thursday night, along with a freelance journalist who has worked for CNN named Mary Moore. (Robert Samuels/The Washington Post)

Ferguson police arrested several protesters on Thursday night, along with a freelance journalist who has worked for CNN named Mary Moore. (Robert Samuels/The Washington Post)

Police in Ferguson arrested at least a half dozen people on Thursday night, ending what had been a relatively tranquil period between the department and the protesters who have shouted at them.

Among those arrested was a freelance journalist who has worked for CNN named Mary Moore. The charges were not immediately clear.

A number of those arrested were part of an activist group known as the Millennials that have taunted the police for days. Late Monday night, they had linked arms and stood in the middle of the street, daring police to arrest them for “standing up for their constitutional rights.” Police eventually walked away from the protesters that night, and Capt. Ron Johnson of the Missouri Highway Patrol said he respected their rights to peaceful protest.

The group reappeared on a rainy Thursday, after police asked protesters to quiet down and obey an 11 p.m. noise ordinance.

The protesters chanted even louder and began to walk toward the police department parking lot with their hands up. From a distance, a police officer on an intercom commanded them to get back on the sidewalk or risk arrest.

Police arrest several protesters in Ferguson, Mo., late on Oct. 3, 2014. (Robert Samuels/The Washington Post)

The protesters locked arms again and continued to chant. At least a dozen police officers approached them quickly, and the group began to race back to the nearby sidewalk.

“Get them,” an officer in a brown uniform told others. They arrested the group quickly, pulling apart those who linked arms, yelling charges to them such as “inciting violence” and “failure to obey. “

In the mix was Moore, the journalist, who was recording the action.

“What a remarkable display of making your own rules as you go,” said Patricia Bynes, a Democratic committeewoman of Ferguson Township. “They took the journalist who was doing her job and wasn’t involved.”

Of the nightly protests in Ferguson after the slaying of unarmed black 18-year-old Michael Brown at the hands of a white police officer Darren Wilson, this rainy night was relatively small and quiet. Protesters had complained that the noise ordinance had been enforced arbitrarily. Some nights police ask then not to drum after 11. But there were no drums on this night and police asked the protesters to stop yelling. They did not comply.