Even though tensions have largely simmered down in Ferguson, Mo. a state of emergency was extended as a precautionary measure on Wednesday afternoon by officials for at least one more night in St. Louis County.

“After reviewing the events of the past two evenings under the state of emergency, I am pleased to report our law enforcement officers have established order while preventing further acts of violence in Ferguson” and nearby suburbs, St. Louis County Executive Steve Stenger said in a statement.

Stenger added, “It is because of their ability to maintain order that I find it prudent to continue the state of emergency for at least the next 24 hours.”

RELATED: Police group declares anniversary of Brown’s death ‘Darren Wilson Day’

A state of emergency was initially declared on Monday afternoon in St. Louis County as more than 100 people were arrested on the second day of demonstrations marking the one-year anniversary of the death of unarmed black teen Michael Brown, who was fatally shot by white police officer Darren Wilson.

In addition, peaceful protests on Monday were overshadowed by violence on Sunday night, when a young man was wounded in a gunfight with plainclothes detectives, following an exchange of gunfire between two rival groups.

Police said that while there were some protests on Tuesday night, they were mostly peaceful and that there were no arrests. St. Louis County Police said at one point officers “successfully negotiated” with demonstrators to leave the middle of a roadway. Separately, some police reported rocks being thrown at them but “police did not take an action, and soon after the rock throwing stopped.”

After the August 2014 shooting, a St. Louis County grand jury chose not to indict Wilson, and the Department of Justice has cleared him of violating Brown’s civil rights. But Brown’s death, alongside similar killings by police in Maryland, South Carolina and Ohio, has sparked a national debate over police treatment of African-Americans.