Here we go again.

Another St. Louis cop has been suspended over making ignorant and threatening statements in public.

Glendale Police Department Officer Matthew Pappert, who helped patrol the racially charged riots in Ferguson, Mo., was taken off the job after making contemptuous remarks on Facebook about the demonstrators.

"These protesters should have been put down like a rabid dog the first night," he posted on his social media page, according to Agence France-Presse.

One of the offensive social media posts that reportedly led to Pappert's suspension. (Facebook)

In another post, he wrote, "I'm sick of these protesters. You are a burden on society and a blight on the community." The comments have since been removed.

Glendale, another St. Louis suburb, sent officers to reinforce Ferguson officers when riots broke out Aug. 9 following the shooting of unarmed teenager Michael Brown by white officer Darren Wilson.

Pappert also referred to the Boston Marathon bombing with a post that read, "Where is a Muslim with a backpack when you need him?"

The contemptuous remarks were made about the demonstrators on Facebook. (Facebook) Officer Matthew Pappert’s profile page on Facebook. He was suspended on Friday over posts that expressed his contempt protesters in Ferguson, Mo. (Facebook) Another St. Louis-area officer suspended for making racially charged statement about the Ferguson, Mo., riots. (Facebook) Sgt. Maj. Dan Page, speaking to the St. Louis/St. Charles, Missouri Chapter of Oath Keepers, explains how they plan to end American sovereignty and the Constitution, establishing martial law and merging the U.S. with the New World Order. (thenewsurvivalist via Youtube)

The Glendale Police Department issued a statement saying the officer was suspended on Friday.

Journalists covering the demonstrations said Pappert had threatened them with his nightstick and seemed prepared to swing, a photographer told AFP.

Also on Friday, a St. Louis County officer was relieved of duty after video of him making sexist and racist comments went viral.

Officer Dan Page was captured referring to President Obama as "an undocumented president" and stated "you run from me, you're gonna die tired."

On Wednesday, an officer from suburban St. Ann was suspended after being caught on video screaming at journalists and threatening to kill them. When asked for his name, Officer Ray Alberts snarled, "go f--- yourself."

On a mobile device? Click here to see the video.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!