ST. LOUIS — A day of remembrance for Michael Brown quickly turned violent late Sunday when police shot a man they said had opened fire on them in Ferguson, Mo., close to where demonstrators gathered.

The shooter, identified as 18-year-old Tyrone Harris Jr. of St. Louis, remains in critical condition, according to St. Louis County police. On Monday afternoon, prosecutors issued 10 charges against Harris — including four counts of first-degree assault on a police officer.

Tyrone Harris Sr., the alleged shooter’s father, told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch that his son and Brown, who was fatally shot by former Ferguson police Officer Darren Wilson, “were real close.”

Three hours after the police-involved shooting, two more teens were wounded in an apparent drive-by shooting as they walked near a memorial honoring Brown.

The unrest prompted officials to place St. Louis County in an immediate state of emergency. The order puts St. Louis County police Chief John Belmar in command over all police emergency management in Ferguson and surrounding areas.

“Chief Belmar shall exercise all powers and duties necessary to preserve order, prevent crimes, and protect the life and property of our citizens,” County Executive Steve Stenger wrote.

A beleaguered-looking Belmar learned of the drive-by shooting moments before briefing reporters on why his officers shot Harris.

There is a “small group of people out there that are intent on making sure we don’t have peace that prevails,” the chief said. “We can't sustain this as a community.”

Protesters yell as police from a line across West Florissant Ave., in Ferguson, Mo., on Sunday before shots were fired near the protest. (AP Photo/Jeff Roberson) More

Belmar said Harris was not a part of the civil rights demonstrations, which drew several hundred protesters to the streets of Ferguson on Sunday evening. Instead, Belmar said, Harris was among a group of suspected looters who later got into a gun battle with at least one person and possibly more.

“They were criminals; they weren’t protesters,” the chief said. “Protesters are out there talking about a way to effect change, whatever that may be.”

When Harris spotted undercover officers tracking him in a vacant lot behind some businesses, he turned and fired on their unmarked police car with a stolen 9mm handgun, Belmar said.

All four officers from the car returned fire and have been placed on routine administrative leave.

“These are tragedies, make no mistake,” Belmar said during an early-morning news conference.

Harris’ father told the Post-Dispatch: “We think there’s a lot more to this than what’s being said.”

The burst of gunfire erupted as other officers were seeking to disperse demonstrators who had begun blocking traffic along a main Ferguson thoroughfare. A TV news crew captured the chaos of the moment as unsuspecting citizens scrambled for cover.

The chief estimated that 40 to 50 shots were exchanged between rival groups before Harris turned on police. “It was a remarkable amount of gunfire,” Belmar said.

A Twitter user, who was attending the protests, posted video of an officer passively standing near Harris, who was lying on the ground.

“Hey, he’s bleeding!” the videographer yells to police. “Please get him some help. He’s bleeding out. Please get him some help, man.”

Minutes after the shots were heard, an Associated Press photographer saw a man lying face-down, covered in blood, behind a boarded-up restaurant. Later, an AP reporter saw a woman overcome with grief. Friends were consoling her. She screamed: “Why did they do it?” Another woman fainted. A man nearby said, “They killed my brother.”