Turkish officials have rained down criticism on the US police for detaining a correspondent of the state Anadolu news agency while he covered protests in Ferguson, Missouri, calling it unacceptable and against the freedom of press.



Anadolu reported on Tuesday that its reporter Bilgin Şaşmaz was threatened by a police officer, beaten and detained for five hours while covering the Ferguson protests.



The agency said on Wednesday that a police officer had threatened to kill Şaşmaz and was suspended. "I was threatened by the police officer. ‘I will kill you if you try to shoot a video again' the officer said," Şaşmaz was quoted as saying by the agency in a news report on its website.



In messages on his Twitter account, Deputy Prime Minister Emrullah İşler said the detention of Şaşmaz was unacceptable. “I sent ‘get-well' wishes to Şaşmaz for this treatment, which contravenes the principle of freedom of the press, and the threat against him,” İşler wrote.



Another deputy prime minister, Bülent Arınç, said in remarks to Anadolu that the threat against the reporter and his subsequent detention were unacceptable. “We condemn this,” he said.



Justice and Development Party (AK Party) Deputy Chairman Süleyman Soylu said the treatment of Şaşmaz by the US police was a “restriction of the right to report” and claimed that Turkey was subject to “double standards,” perhaps referring to government complaints that the Western media, particularly that of the US, misrepresented last summer's Gezi protests in Turkey by giving excessive coverage to reports biased toward protesters.



State Department rejects hypocrisy claim



Responding to numerous questions on the incident, US State Department Deputy Spokesperson Marie Harf dismissed a suggestion that the US failure to condemn the detention of the Turkish journalist amounts to hypocrisy.

“I would wholly disagree with your notion that there's any hypocrisy,” Harf said to a journalist, insisting that the Ferguson incident and the detentions of journalists in Turkey and other countries, which have been criticized by the US in the past, were not comparable.



Harf declined to comment on Şaşmaz's detention, saying it is a matter for local authorities. “I certainly don't speak for the local police in Ferguson. What we've said is that freedom of expression is an incredibly important principle that we adhere to here in the United States. When we feel that there are challenges to that anywhere we speak up about it. But I don't have any details on his case specifically. I'd refer you to the local authorities,” she said.

