CLOSE Zemir Begic was beaten to death with hammers in a gruesome attack on a treet corner in St. Louis in front of his fiancee on Sunday. VPC

From left, brothers Denis Begic and Rasim Begic and their uncle, Esad Begic, sit Tuesday in Waterloo, Iowa. Denis and Rasim are younger brothers to the late Zemir Begic, 32, who was beat to death Sunday in St. Louis. (Photo: Kyle Munson, The Des Moines Register)

WATERLOO, Iowa — The murder of a Bosnian-American man by gruesome means — beaten with hammers at 1:15 a.m. Sunday on a street corner in St. Louis in front of his fiancee — has added yet another curveball to the national debate on race and violence centered in Missouri's second-largest city.

The death has been labeled the "hammer slaying" in stark media shorthand.

The unfortunate soul behind the headlines was Zemir Begic, a 32-year-old carpenter, plumber, karate black belt and jack of all trades who got engaged to be married this year and moved to St. Louis less than four months ago. He was between jobs, and his fiancee has family in the city.

Begic (pronounced "Beg-itch") was the oldest of four siblings and had lived in Waterloo.

His sister and two brothers are now in Sioux Falls, S.D., with their mother, Ferida Alagic.

"Justice for Zemir is all I want," said youngest brother Rasim, 20, a pre-med student at the University of South Dakota. He returned to Waterloo this week at the home of his cousin, Asmir Begic, 34, as the family gathered to mourn amid their utter confusion.

Rasim has filled his Twitter feed with the #JusticeForZemir hashtag.

Meanwhile, a GoFundMe online campaign to help pay for Begic's funeral has raised more than $32,000 from more than 500 donors based on a $15,000 request.

Begic's father, with two of his own brothers, trekked to St. Louis to retrieve his son's body. By Wednesday evening the plan was to conduct the Waterloo funeral Saturday with help from the local Bosnian Islamic Association.

"Honestly, I don't understand," Rasim said of his brother's killing. He had looked up to his brother as a role model ever since the family emigrated from the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, as part of the tens of thousands of civil war refugees resettled by the State Department.

Police have described Begic's death as a "wrong place, wrong time" attack in which four teens allegedly taunted him and coaxed him out of his car.

His fiancee, Arijana Mujkanovic, was unharmed, and so was Mujkanovic's aunt and a friend.

CLOSE Murder charges have been filed against 17-year-old Robert Mitchell in the death of 32-year-old Zemir Begic, a Bosnian-American who was attacked and killed by youths wielding hammers in St. Louis. VPC

The 17-year-old already charged with murder happens to be black. Two more teens have been held: a black 16-year-old and a Hispanic 15-year-old. Police have sought a fourth teen who allegedly participated.

Of course this comes on the heels of the shooting death in August of Michael Brown, an unarmed black man gunned down in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson.

The grand jury process resulted in no criminal charges this month for the white policeman who killed Brown. There have been violent clashes in Ferguson as protests have rippled nationwide.

So the scene was set for Begic's murder to be interpreted as a black-on-white crime of retribution. No evidence has surfaced to support such claims.

St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay this week issued a statement to try to calm his city's Bosnian community. About 300 people rallied in St. Louis' Bevo Mill neighborhood Monday and reportedly chanted: "Bosnian lives matter!"

"Speculation that this attack had anything to do with the Ferguson protests is absolutely unfounded," the mayor said.

Yet Asmir, 34, who now runs his own trucking company out of the basement of his Waterloo home, believes the teens "were affected to a certain point from the situation in Ferguson."

Zuhdi Masri, left, prays for murder victim Zemir Begic with a group of other Bosnians gathered on Holly Hills Avenue in St. Louis on Monday. (Photo: David Carson, AP)

"But I don't think that they knew how serious that would lead to," he added. "And what degree of seriousness they're going to get into.

"I don't think kids at that age think like that."

When Asmir was a kid that age 20 years ago, he and his late cousin's family were among some 15,000 war refugees who fled to a camp in Croatia and spent two years there.

The Begic families immigrated to Utica, N.Y. Asmir moved to Iowa in 1997, and Begic followed the next year.

The latest U.S. census estimate shows about 120,000 Bosnian-Americans, a figure that has remained steady in recent years. St. Louis claims one of the largest Bosnian communities in the nation, although a popular estimate of 70,000 residents has been criticized as an inflated figure.

Back in Waterloo, a piece of cake sat untouched on the coffee table in front of Denis, Begic's other brother. He turned 26 Tuesday but found no joy in his birthday.

"I can't stop thinking about it, how it happened," Denis said of the murder. "I'm trying to forget about it and have good memories about my brother. He did not deserve this."

Denis, who now works in a warehouse in Sioux Falls, managed a small chuckle when he remembered how his brother loved to belt out Bosnian songs in the shower. That was when the two lived together in Phoenix for a year and had their own moving service.

Rasim, who towers above the rest of his family at 6 feet 5 inches, slumped onto the sofa as he recalled how the family in Sioux Falls learned of Begic's death more than 600 miles away.

Begic's mother first received a Facebook message in the middle of the night from one of her own brothers. She eventually was roused out of her sleepy confusion by her phone, which wouldn't stop buzzing and beeping.

"It felt like it was a dream," Rasim said of his mother's knock on his bedroom door.

"She just dropped down to her knees," he said. "She couldn't really believe it."

Sister Denisa, 23, screamed when she was given the news.

Denisa wrote on the GoFundMe site: "I will forever have a big piece of my heart destroyed. ... I want my brother back. He always protected me. ... Life will never be the same. I love you so much. Till we meet again. #JusticeForZemir."

What does #JusticeForZemir mean for these grieving siblings?

"I do want life in prison," Rasim said. "Not just to the 17-year-old. I want it to all four of them. This is not something any family should go through."

Asmir struck a more measured tone: "We're just going to let the court system and the justice system to decide on that end. And whatever the decision is made, it's not going to bring Zemir back. But we're going to have to accept the fact that whatever the court system decides, that's what we have to accept and that's what we have to live by."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1zSqTG2