Number of people arrested, injured continues to rise in Ferguson

FERGUSON, Mo. (KMOV.com) – At least 10 people, including three officers, suffered injuries and at least 75 people have been arrested in the aftermath of an officer-involved shooting that killed 18-year-old Michael Brown.

Brian Schellman, with the St. Louis County Police Department, said close to 300 police officers from at least 15 different departments were called to Ferguson Sunday night when angry mobs began smashing windows, setting fires and looting businesses in the area.

Schellman said a St. Louis County officer injured his knee while at a Foot Locker store during the rioting. He said another officer was injured when he had a brick thrown at him.

Raw Video: Aftermath of looting in Ferguson

Throughout Sunday evening, numerous cop cars sustained damage and Ferguson Police Chief Tom Jackson said someone in a yellow pickup truck fired shots at officers while circling a WalMart parking lot. Chief Jackson said he got into a cop car to give chase to the truck but the truck got away.

Police said shots were also fired at a police helicopter in the area.

According to police, two men were assaulted at a Phillips 66 in the 1100 block of Riverview during the riots. Police say three suspects used a bat to injury a 54-year-old man who attempted to stop them for leaving the store with stolen merchandise. Authorities said the victim was taken to an area hospital in stable condition following the assault.

According to St. Louis County police, 32 people were arrested Sunday night, 10 for looting and 22 for destruction of property, and 15 people were arrested during a protest in Ferguson Monday morning.

Raw Video: Exclusive interview with witness of looting in Ferguson



“Fortunately several of the looters were caught during the crime,” said Jon Belmar of the St. Louis County Police. “It’s an easy case to wrap up.” Various reports say that several looted items were already sold online, but Belmar says that has not been confirmed.

Police say social media also played a role in the looting saying it was “an efficient way to communicate,” helping direct looters to various locations.

Ferguson Mayor James Knowles III and Chief Jackson told News 4 they are confident the people who rioted Sunday night are from Jennings and Dellwood, not Ferguson.

Police also responded to reports of shootings throughout the area. At one point, windows of a News 4 live truck were smashed out by the angry crowd.

One witness told News 4 a group of people attempted to steal an ATM from a gas station.

PHOTOS: Computer | Mobile

News video and amateur video from the scene captured mobs of crowds racing into stores and businesses and then rushing out with armloads of stolen goods.

Tuesday night, the unrest continued with five shootings and 12 arrests throughout the St. Louis area. The incidents occurred hours after Rev. Al Sharpton urged for calm throughout the area.

Police said one man was listed in critical condition after following an officer-involved shooting blocks from where Sharpton spoke earlier in the evening. Police said a masked man showed a gun to an officer and, fearing for his life, the officer shot him.

Authorities said the 12 people were taken into custody Tuesday night custody for assaulting an officer and failure to disperse after the rallies.

Also Tuesday night, a woman was taken to an area hospital after being shot in the head by a low caliber bullet, she is expected to survive. Police also transported an 18-year-old, 20-year-old and unidentified person after separate shootings in north St. Louis County and Jennings.

Protesters began gathering in Ferguson Wednesday evening in a peaceful march, but tensions escalated quickly. Throughout the evening, at least 16 people were arrested, among them was Alderman Antonio French and two reporters who were covering the unrest in the area.

News 4’s Scott Thomas said police showed restraint Wednesday night, but then began to use the tear gas when objects were thrown at them. A spokesperson for the St. Louis County Police Department said tear gas was deployed after protesters threw rocks and molotov cocktails at police.

Authorities said one officer suffered a broken ankle during Wednesday’s altercation with protesters.