A suburban St. Louis police officer who threatened to kill media members as he pointed his high-powered rifle at a group of people filming Tuesday night’s protests in Ferguson, Mo., has been suspended after video of the incident went viral Wednesday.

The St. Ann, Mo. police officer, who told one man his name was “go f--- yourself,” has been “relieved of duty and suspended indefinitely” for his “inappropriate” actions, the St. Louis County Police Department said in a statement to Mashable.

The officer was later identified as Lt. Ray Albers, a 20-year veteran of the force, St. Ann Police Chief Aaron Jimenez told the St. Lous Post-Dispatch.

In the minute-long video clip, the portly, bald police officer is seen pointing his semi-automatic assault rifle at crowds of people walking along a Ferguson street just before midnight Tuesday.

The officer refused to say his name, saying instead, 'go f--- yourself.' (Caleb-Michael Files via YouTube) A St. Louis County police sergeant eventually forced the officer to lower his weapon after the shocking incident. (Caleb-Michael Files via YouTube)

WARNING: CLICK HERE TO SEE UNEDITED VIDEO WITH GRAPHIC LANGUAGE

“My hands are up bro, my hands are up,” the reporter, who was using the screen name “Rebelutionary_Z” to livestream the protests, is heard saying.

“Get the f--- away from, get the f--- away from me,” Albers replies as he wheels around, all the while keeping his high-powered rifle at shoulder level. “I will f---ing kill you, get back!” he screams as he approaches the group, forcing them back onto a sidewalk.

Albers was suspended Wednesday from the St. Ann's police force after the shocking video went viral. (LeakSourceInfo via YouTube)

The stunned reporters can barely believe what just happened.

“You’re gonna kill him?” the incredulous photojournalist says as the officer continues to walk. “What’s your name sir?”

“Go f--- yourself,” Albers fires back as he keeps moving down the road, his gun still raised.

The group begins to taunt the cop: “Your name’s ‘go f--- yourself?’ Ok, go f--- yourself. Thank you Officer Go F--- Yourself.”

“The unified command strongly feels these actions are inappropriate, and not indicative of the officers who have worked daily to keep the peace,” St. Louis County police said in a statement.

A second video, posted by Caleb-Michael Files, shows the journalist urge the officer to “put the f---ing gun down!”

Police arrest a man as they disperse a protest in Ferguson, Mo. early Wednesday, Aug. 20, 2014. (Charlie Riedel/AP)

“Get back!” Albers barks as a surge of photojournalists enter the frame and another cop, later identified as a St. Louis County police sergeant, walks over and forces the St. Ann officer to lower the weapon and walk away.

The startling video clip prompted the Missouri chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union to write a letter to the Missouri State Highway Patrol about the incident.

The incident prompted a flurry of tweets with the hashtage #OfficerGoF---Yourself, and even a satirical Twitter account under the handle @ofcgof---urself.

A man urges the crowd to leave as police disperse a protest in Ferguson, Mo. early Wednesday, Aug. 20, 2014. (Charlie Riedel/AP) A man is moved by a line of police as authorities disperse a protest in Ferguson, Mo. early Wednesday, Aug. 20, 2014. (Charlie Riedel/AP)

Albers has been suspended without pay. He reportedly saw someone with the crowd with a BB gun, Jimenez told the Post-Dispatch.

Albers has three times before, including once last year, had on-duty disciplinary issues. He "got into it with a citizen and instead of just letting the conversation go, he chose to say some inappropriate things," Jimenez told the paper.

"This is his second time with the wrong choice of words," the chief said.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO

sgoldstein@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!