Three Missouri police officers are off the force in the wake of the Ferguson protests.

One, who was filmed pointing a rifle at journalists while threatening to gun them down, has resigned. Another cop has been canned and a third has retired, both after making inflammatory remarks.

St. Ann police Lt. Ray Albers, who was widely ridiculed after calling himself “Officer Go F--- Yourself” and making other obscene remarks to protesters in Ferguson last week, was relieved of his duties Thursday, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported.

Officer Matthew Pappert of Glendale was fired Thursday after writing that Ferguson protestors should be 'put down like rabid dogs,' on Facebook. He has since apologized for his choice of words. (Facebook)

Albers’ resignation comes a little more than a week after he was suspended without pay for a disturbing video capturing him pointing his weapon at people while warning: “I will f---ing kill you. Get back.”

Glendale officer Matthew Pappert, was fired Thursday for having posted on Facebook that Ferguson protesters should be “put down like rabid dogs.”

One day after video surfaced of Albers pointing his weapon at members at the public and threatening to kill them, he was suspended without pay. St. Ann's police chief has said he regrets his leaving the force. (Aaron P. Bernstein/Getty Images)

St. Louis County cop Dan Page, who was shown on video spewing vitriolic remarks about President Obama, Muslims and sexual orientation, has retired.

Meanwhile, six people who were arrested in the town where a black teen was killed by a white cop say police responding to the civil unrest treated them like “war combatants” and are suing for $40 million.

St. Ann Police Chief Aaron Jimenez said that Albers reacted appropriately by raising his weapon after seeing someone in the crowd with a gun. He also said someone threw water and urine on him. (LUCAS JACKSON/REUTERS)

Dwayne Matthews Jr. said he was walking to his mother’s house when “police officers in military type uniform” shot him repeatedly with rubber bullets. Matthews said he was charged with “failing to disperse” even though he was not anywhere near the protests against the killing of 18-year-old Michael Brown.

Damon Coleman and Theophilus Green said they were taking part in a peaceful protest when police in “military tank-like vehicles” began firing tear gas, rubber bullets and stun grenades at them.

The lawsuit names St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar, Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson and their officers as defendants.

With Corinne Lestch

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!