Thousands of New Yorkers took to the streets Thursday night to show solidarity with protesters in the St. Louis suburb rocked by the police shooting of an unarmed black teen.

The demonstrators gathered in Harlem; Union Square; Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn; and Jamaica, Queens, for a moment of silence at 7 p.m. in support of protesters 1,000 miles away in Ferguson, Mo.

“I’m a parent and grandparent — I could not imagine if that was my child or grandchild,” Toni Arenstein, 64, of Chelsea said in Union Square, of Michael Brown, 18, who was shot to death Saturday by a white cop in Ferguson.

Demonstrators hold their hands up in Times Square after marching from Union Square. (Sam Costanza) Demonstrators gather in Times Square over Michael Brown shooting. (Sam Costanza) NYPD cops stand in line before demonstrators in Times Square. (Sam Costanza) A bus driver is forced to stop on Broadway as protesters crowd Times Square. (Sam Costanza)

Demonstrators in Union Square show solidarity with protestors in Ferguson, Mo. over the death of 18-year-old Michael Brown. (Sam Costanza for New York Daily News) Demonstrators in Union Square show solidarity with protestors in Ferguson, Mo. over the death of 18-year-old Michael Brown. (Sam Costanza for New York Daily News) Demonstrators in Union Square show solidarity with protestors in Ferguson, Mo. over the death of 18-year-old Michael Brown. (Sam Costanza for New York Daily News)

The international hacker collective Anonymous sent out a call on the Internet for a “day of rage” to coincide with a National Moment of Silence across the nation Thursday.

More than 100 rallies were held throughout the country, including protests in Chicago, Los Angeles and Washington, D.C.

The protests came a day after police in riot gear fired tear gas and stun grenades to break up a protest in Ferguson, where some people hurled bottles and Molotov cocktails at officers.

Protesters gathered in Union Square Thursday for a 7 p.m. moment of silence. (Sam Costanza/for New York Daily News)

After congregating in Union Square, protesters began marching uptown, collecting supporters along the way. By the time they reached Times Square, demonstrators numbered in the low thousands.

Cops put up barricades on Seventh Ave. and formed a line to stop the crowd from marching north on Broadway.

Five protesters were arrested and charged with resisting arrest, inciting riot, criminal trespass and disorderly conduct, according to the NYPD. Their names had not been released early Friday.

Nearly 200 protesters gathered in Morningside Park in Harlem, where they lit candles to remember victims of police brutality. Among those at the demonstration was Denisha Jingles of Ferguson, Mo.

“That is my home. Seeing what our men go through daily, it’s not fair,” Jingles said.About 300 protesters formed a peaceful circle in Fulton Park in Bedford-Stuyvesant, as cops stood at a distance.

Roughly 100 people also gathered in Baisley Pond Park in Jamaica. Some held signs reading, “Fists up, guns down.”

With Doyle Murphy, Eli Rosenberg and Ryan Sit

On a mobile device? Click here to watch the livestream.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!