Internet activists in the Middle East, who are used to sharing social media evidence of police crackdowns on dissent at home, spent part of this week drawing attention to the same sort of images flowing from the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson.

Several Egyptian protest veterans pointed to photographs and video from Missouri. Ana Mubasher, a live streaming project founded in 2012 to broadcast video of protests in Egypt as they unfolded, shared links and screengrabs from the feeds of local news stations in St. Louis. Hossam el-Hamalawy, a blogger and journalist in Cairo, shared images posted online by Antonio French, a St. Louis alderman who was arrested while documenting the protests in Ferguson on Wednesday night.

In addition to echoing the messages of solidarity sent through Twitter to the protesters in Missouri, Egyptians and Palestinians also offered something more useful: practical advice about how to deal with tear gas.

As Annalisa Merelli reported for Quartz, Mariam Barghouti in the West Bank and Dr. Rajai Abu Khalil in East Jerusalem were among those sending tips to Ferguson.

Rana Nazzal, a Palestinian-Canadian activist who has taken part in protests against the Israeli occupation in the West Bank village of Nabi Saleh, added some hints of her own.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Sherif Mansour, an Egyptian-American rights activist, observed that video of heavily armed officers shooting tear gas at a television crew from Al Jazeera on Wednesday night, and then dismantling their equipment, would likely please the authorities in Egypt.

Egypt’s military-backed government has been outraged by American criticism of the long jail terms three journalists from the same network were sentenced to in June.





The Cairene bloggers who write as The Big Pharaoh and Cairo City Limits agreed that the images from Ferguson would undercut American complaints about the use of force against protesters and journalists by Egypt’s security forces.

Maryam Alkhawaja, a rights activist whose family played a leading role in the 2011 uprising in Bahrain, pointed out that there were connections between the militarized police units protesters were facing in the United States and the brutal crackdown in her country.

Not least, the fact that the monarchy in Bahrain, like the security forces in Egypt, another American ally, tried to clear the streets night after night in 2011 with wave after wave of tear gas manufactured in the U.S.

Ms. Alkhawaja also detected a painful visual echo of the protesters in Ferguson approaching officers with their hands in the air, and Bahrainis who were gunned down making the same gesture and chanting, “Peaceful! Peaceful!”

Activists in Bahrain pointed to a more direct connection too. In late 2011, the Persian Gulf monarchy’s interior ministry boasted that it had hired an American “supercop,” John Timoney, as an adviser. Mr. Timoney was once a senior officer in the New York Police Department, and later served as the police chief of Philadelphia and then Miami.