Kareem Jackson, a rap artist and community activist whose stage name is Tef Poe, said some “organizations on the national level come here and they believe that this is the usual ‘Kumbaya,’ ‘we’re mad,’ ‘we’re angry,’ ‘we’re sad,’ have a candlelight vigil and then, when it’s all said and done, name a highway after the victims.”

He added later: “They’re using tactics that come from a different generation, and it got the results that those tactics are capable of getting. At this current moment we believe that you need a little bit more.”

Mr. Brooks, the N.A.A.C.P. president, said he understood the generational divide.

“The split is as old as the country,” he said. “When I was that age, I thought the same thing.”

By Monday evening, the authorities were reporting a total of at least 50 arrests on charges that included “refusal to disperse” and “peace disturbance.” No injuries were reported, and officials noted that the protesters, in some cases, were openly asking to be arrested.

Photo

“Arrests were not made until protesters started bumping police officers’ shields and eventually forcing through the police skirmish line,” a police spokesman said.

The planned day of civil disobedience, which organizers said was patterned after “moral Monday” demonstrations that began last year in North Carolina, started in the early hours of Monday, as hundreds of marchers made their way to a clock tower at St. Louis University and announced they were staying. Their numbers had dwindled to about 25 by dawn.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The university president, Fred P. Pestello, said in an open letter that the school “had no prior knowledge that this action would take place.” He added that “it was our decision to not escalate the situation with any confrontation, especially since the protest was nonviolent.” St. Louis University, a Jesuit institution of over 13,900 students, is holding midterm exams this week.

By late morning, religious leaders from around the country and protesters, including Mr. West, were locking arms and making their way down a main street in Ferguson and to the Police Department. As they arrived at the department, which has been the scene of testy protests since Mr. Brown’s death, the religious leaders of numerous faiths stepped forward to a line of waiting police, offering to “take their confessions” and pray with them. An outline of a body was drawn on the ground — a reminder, organizers said, of Mr. Brown but also of the scores of other people killed by police officers.

Some here spoke of Vonderrit D. Myers Jr., a black teenager who was killed Wednesday by a white off-duty police officer working on a patrol for a private security company. The St. Louis police have said Mr. Myers used a stolen handgun to fire on the officer, but Mr. Myers’s supporters have said he was not carrying a weapon.

Photo

Other protesters spoke of John Crawford III, a 22-year-old who was fatally shot by the police in Ohio in August after picking up an air rifle in the aisle of a Walmart store.

“Black lives matter!” the crowd chanted. “All lives matter!”

The arrests were calm as clergy members and others said they wished to meet with Ferguson police officers inside the building, then stepped forward after saying they were prepared to be arrested if they could not.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Hours later, at City Hall in St. Louis, demonstrators arrived and presented demands that included a meeting with the mayor, Francis G. Slay, and measures they said would promote police accountability, such as body cameras. “We will close this place until our demands are met,” Kennard Williams, the protest’s leader, said.

Mr. Slay’s chief of staff, Jeff Rainford, told the protesters they would receive an audience with the mayor. “We will, I promise you, be listening to you,” Mr. Rainford told Mr. Williams. “You will be part of the discussion and part of the debate.”

Mr. Williams said protests would resume at City Hall if municipal officials did not agree to the demonstrators’ requests.

As night fell, more demonstrations took place at three Walmart stores, at a National Football League game in St. Louis and outside a political fund-raiser for a county executive candidate.