CLOSE A grand jury did not indict Ferguson, Mo., police officer Darren Wilson on any charges in a decision announced Monday night. VPC

Grand jury verdict: A demonstrator wipes her eyes as she joins others to say a prayer in front of the police station in Ferguson on Nov. 24 after a St. Louis County grand jury declined to indict Darren Wilson. (Photo: Jewel Samad, AFP/Getty Images)



FERGUSON, Mo. -- A white police officer will not face charges for fatally shooting an unarmed black teenager in a case that set off violent protests and racial unrest throughout the nation.

CLOSE Protestors, angry over the grand jury decision not to indict Michael Brown, take to the streets in cities across the nation.

A St. Louis County grand jury declined to indict officer Darren Wilson, 28, for firing six shots in an August confrontation that killed 18-year-old Michael Brown, St. Louis County prosecutor Robert McCulloch said Monday night.

Crowds of protesters filled streets near the Ferguson police station following the announcement. A police car and stores were set on fire, other stores were looted, gunfire was heard and bricks were hurled. Police said they had been fired on and responded with smoke bombs and pepper spray before using tear gas.

Police later said they came under heavy automatic weapon fire, and some buildings were left to burn because of the danger. County police said an officer suffered a gunshot wound, but it was unclear if it was because of the protest violence.

Protests sprang up in cities from New York to Los Angeles and remained mostly peaceful. At least half a dozen commercial airline flights into St. Louis were diverted out of concerns about the unrest.

The Federal Aviation Administration at 11:15 p.m. ET said it had restricted flights into and out of Lambert International Airport in St. Louis to "provide a safe environment for law enforcement activities." The restriction lifts at 5:15 a.m. ET.



The grand jury's decision had been long awaited and followed earlier Ferguson rioting that resembled war-zone news footage in this predominantly black suburb of St. Louis.

PROTESTS: Demonstrators hit streets across nation

FAMILY: Michael Brown's mom screams, sobs at decision

In Washington, President Obama appeared before TV cameras. "We need to accept that this decision was the grand jury's to make,'' he said in calling for peaceful protests. But Obama said the Ferguson case "speaks to broader challenges that we still face as a nation.''

Prosecutor McCulloch made the announcement in an unusual nighttime presentation in a courtroom. He spoke at length about media coverage of the case and what he called the unreliability of eyewitness accounts. He said the grand jury weighed evidence and testimony before concluding there was no probable cause to indict the officer.

"The duty of the grand jury is to separate fact from fiction,'' McCulloch said.

He said prosecuting attorneys presented five potential indictments to the grand jury, and all were rejected.

"The jury was not inclined to indict on any charges,'' Benjamin Crump, an attorney for Brown's family, said after being informed of the decision by authorities.

In grand jury testimony released by prosecutors Monday night, Wilson, the officer, described the confrontation and said that Brown refused his instructions to stop walking in the street. He said Brown cursed him, then slammed the officer's car door shut as he was trying to exit his vehicle.

He said Brown appeared to be trying "almost like to intimidate or overpower me.'' They scuffled and Brown hit the officer, Wilson testified.

"When I grabbed him, the only way I can describe it is I felt like a five-year-old holding Hulk Hogan,'' Wilson said.

He had no Taser weapon and felt his mace spray would not work, Wilson said: "So the only other option I thought I had was my gun." He drew it, he said, and told Brown to "get back or I'm going to shoot you." He said Brown grabbed the gun with his right hand and twisted it, pushing it down into Wilson's hip, before the officer fired.

Brown's family attorneys received a call from McCulloch shortly before the announcement that there would be no charges against the officer. Crump took the call and and delivered the news to Brown's family in an area hotel.

REACTION: Legal and advocacy groups sound off

APOLOGY: Peter King sorry for 'indictment' tweet

Lesley McSpadden, Brown's mother, cried and shouted when Crump told her there was no indictment and that the prosecutor was willilng to meet with the family.

McSpadden began crying and shouting. Her body vibrated with pain as she jumped to her feet.

"I do want to meet with him right now," McSpadden screamed. "What do you mean no indictment?!"

She then ran out of a hotel room followed by family members.

Brown's family later released a statement saying, "We are profoundly disappointed that the killer of our child will not face the consequence of his actions.'' They urged others who share their pain to "channel your frustration in ways that will make a positive change.''

Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon, a Democrat, called for calm after calling up National Guard troops to stand by in case of unrest. Speaking before the decision was announced, he urged that "regardless of the decision, people on all sides show tolerance, mutual respect and restraint.''

Crowds gathered around the Ferguson police headquarters in anticipation of the announcement at the courthouse in Clayton, Mo., another St. Louis suburb.

The 12-person grand jury had been considering whether probable cause existed to bring charges against Wilson, 28, the white officer who fatally shot Brown, an 18-year-old black man, after their Aug. 9 confrontation. The shooting inflamed tensions in a largely minority community that is patrolled by an overwhelmingly white police force.

Brown's lifeless and bleeding body lay for more than four hours in a Ferguson residential street after the shooting, prompting dismay and anger as a crowd gathered. Protests turned into rioting and looting the following night, and police responded with armored vehicles and tear gas, triggering a nationwide debate over police tactics.

The grand jury, including nine whites and three African Americans, had been meeting in secret for months, hearing evidence and weighing whether Wilson's should face charges that could have ranged from involuntary manslaughter to murder.

Brown's family joined thousands of protesters to demand Wilson's arrest in the weeks after the death of their son. As anger at official inaction grew following Brown's death, protesters clashed with police, who began patrolling the streets with military-grade weapons and armored vehicles.

Wilson has been on paid leave and largely invisible since the shooting.

While the grand jury met in secret to hear evidence in the case, two starkly different versions of the events leading to the shooting emerged in media accounts.

Police have said a scuffle broke out after Wilson asked Brown and a friend to move out of the street. Wilson told investigators he shot Brown only after the teenager reached for the officer's gun. Some witnesses said Brown had run away from Wilson, then turned and raised his hands in the air in a gesture of surrender before he was shot in the head and chest.

Paul Morris (center front) boards up his store in Ferguson on Nov. 24. (Photo: Nick Oza, USA TODAY)

The unusual timing of the grand jury's announcement, after darkness had fallen, was a decision of prosecutors, Nixon said.

St. Louis Mayor Francis Slay acknowledged the case "has deeply divided us'' but said "turning violent or damaging property will not be tolerated.''

"The world will be watching us,'' Slay said.

The death of Brown touched off weeks of protests, and the decision by the grand jury on whether to bring charges prompted extraordinary precautions by law enforcement and the community. The Ferguson school district canceled Tuesday classes.

Police officers secure an area in front of the Buzz Westfall Justice Center in Clayton, Mo. (Photo: Jewel Samad, AFP/Getty Images)

Wilson could still face civil rights charges brought by the Justice Department or a civil wrongful death lawsuit filed by Brown's parents.

Contributing: Brad Heath, Pete Eisler, USA TODAY; KSDK-TV, St. Louis

Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson protesters claim outsiders shot police | 1:24 Prayers were offered for protesters and police the evening after two officers were shot while standing guard outside the Ferguson Police Department. VPC 1 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Obama weighs in on Ferguson shooting of two cops on 'Kimmel' | 1:16 On "Jimmy Kimmel Live," President Obama discussed the situation in Ferguson, MO, from recent shootings of two police officers to the DOJ report. Video provided by Newsy Newslook 2 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Holder: Ferguson police shooting 'repugnant' | 1:37 Attorney General Eric Holder condemned the shootings of two police officers outside the Ferguson police department, calling it a "pure ambush" and the act of a "damn punk." He also announced a pilot program aimed at curbing racial bias. (March 12) AP 3 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON 2 officers shot in Ferguson out of hospital | 1:51 Two officers were shot in front of the Ferguson Police Department early Thursday while demonstrators were gathered across the street — an attack the county police chief described as "an ambush" that could easily have killed both men. (March 12) AP 4 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Mo. cop injuries not expected to be long-term | 2:17 St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar says the two officers shot during a protest in Ferguson aren't expected to have long-term injuries. (March 12) AP 5 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson witness heard bullets 'woosh' by head | 1:31 Bradley Rayford, who joined protestors outside the Ferguson, Missouri Police Department Wednesday night, says bullets "wooshed" by his head before striking two police officers. (March 12) AP 6 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Police search Ferguson home after officer shooting | 1:21 Police searched a home in Ferguson Thursday morning, following the shooting of two officers. According to neighbors, three people were taken away in handcuffs. A car was also towed from the home. VPC 7 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Shooting of two officers in Ferguson was an 'ambush' | 2:07 While police still do not have a suspect in the shooting of two cops early Thursday morning in Ferguson, St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar says a handgun was most likely the weapon used. VPC 8 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Videos appear to show shooting of cops in Ferguson | 1:16 Videos posted online appear to show scenes from Ferguson, Missouri where two officers were shot early Thursday morning. St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar says he is working off the assumption that the shots were fired directly at police. VPC 9 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Raw: Amateur video captures moment of shooting | 0:53 Amateur video from Ferguson, Missouri, captures moment of police officer shootings outside police department. Shots fired a few hours after resignation of Police Chief Thomas Jackson. (March 12) AP 10 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Police Chief: Ferguson Shooter Targeted Officers | 1:20 St. Louis County police are searching for suspects in the shooting of two police officers in Ferguson, Missouri. One officer was shot in the face. The other was hit in the shoulder. (March 12) AP 11 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON 2 police officers shot during protests in Ferguson | 1:02 Two police officers are hospitalized after being shot outside the Ferguson Police Department. One officer was hit in the face, the other in the shoulder. Protesters gathered there after the police chief announced his resignation on Wednesday. VPC 12 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Two police officers shot during Ferguson protests | 0:53 Two St. Louis County Police officers were shot outside the Ferguson Police Department early Thursday. St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar said one officer was shot in the shoulder and one was shot in the face. Both officers were conscious. 13 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson police chief resigns in light of DOJ report | 1:33 Ferguson Mayor James Knowles announced the resignation of Tom Jackson, the city's police chief, in what he hopes will be a big step in helping the community move forward. VPC 14 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson city manager resigns after scathing DOJ report | 1:50 Ferguson City Manager John Shaw's resignation was accepted Tuesday night by the city council, effective immediately. His is one of several resignations in the city following a scathing report from the Department of Justice. VPC 15 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson judge resigns after scathing DOJ report | 1:57 Judge Ronald Brockmeyer resigned after last week's Department of Justice report found he punished the most vulnerable residents of Ferguson with fines and fees. He's also accused of fixing traffic tickets for himself and colleagues. VPC 16 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON DOJ: Ferguson engaged in racially biased enforcement | 1:16 A Justice Department review has found that Missouri's troubled Ferguson Police Department engaged in a pattern of racially biased enforcement. VPC 17 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Brown Family Atty: Ferguson Needs Solutions | 1:16 The attorney for Michael Brown's family says Ferguson, Missouri needs solutions. This comes after a Justice Department report blacks in Ferguson are disproportionately subject to excessive police force, baseless traffic stops and citations. (March. AP 18 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Obama: 'Moment is now' to make police changes | 1:06 President Barack Obama said Monday that the deaths of unarmed black men in Missouri and New York show that law enforcement needs to change practices to build trust in minority communities. (March 2) AP 19 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Records reveal police wanted National Guard in Ferguson | 1:45 New documents reveal National Guard troops were rerouted from various parts of Ferguson to back up police. VPC 20 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson firefighters recount night of riot | 1:37 Firefighters testify in front of the Missouri General Assembly about their response on the night of the Mike Brown grand jury decision. VPC 21 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Raw: Scuffle breaks out at St. Louis hearing | 0:51 The first public discussion about a proposed civilian police oversight board in St. Louis, Missouri was cut short after a commotion broke out at a hearing. When several officers began to testify against the bill, a scuffle ensued. (Jan. 29) AP 22 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON St. Louis County Police: Ferguson 'spun out of control' | 1:42 St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar expresses his disappointment in the minimal amount of peaceful protesters and the extreme measures that protesters took. VPC 23 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson businesses struggle to recover after riots | 1:54 In the aftermath of the November riots, business has been extremely slow for some Ferguson establishments. Many are finding it too difficult to stay open. VPC 24 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON 8 candidates file to run for Ferguson City Council | 1:21 In the wake of the fatal shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black man, at the hands of a white police officer, eight people have filed to run for Ferguson City Council. VPC 25 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Darren Wilson set to be cleared of federal charges | 1:19 The federal investigation into Darren Wilson did not yield enough evidence to support criminal charges in the shooting death of Michael Brown, according to two unnamed U.S. officials. VPC 26 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Gunshots slow down response to fires in Ferguson | 1:55 Firefighters in Ferguson, MO were battling around 25 building fires early Tuesday morning, hours after the announcement that the grand jury would not file charges against Darren Wilson. Firefighters couldn't get to some fires because of gunfire. VPC 27 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Michael Brown charges at Officer Wilson explained in testimony | 2:33 A grand jury declined to indict Ferguson, Missouri Police Officer Darren Wilson for fatally shooting Michael Brown, an unarmed African-American teenager and the grand jury revealed Wilson's testimony. VPC 28 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Cars burst into flames, explode at Ferguson dealership | 1:55 Following the grand jury's decision not to indict Officer Darren Wilson chaos has ensued in Ferguson, a parking lot of cars have been broken into and set on fire. VPC 29 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson protesters looting, burning businesses, police cars | 1:39 Reports of looting and business fires were reported in the area of Ferguson, Missouri after a grand jury did not indict Officer Darren Wilson in the shooting death of Michael Brown. VPC 30 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON ‘I honestly feel heart-broken’: reaction to Ferguson | 1:51 Protesters in Oakland, Calif., where hundreds gathered after a grand jury decided not to indict Missouri police officer Darren Wilson in the death of unarmed teenager Michael Brown, explain their frustration and disappointment. Chris Wiggins for USA TODAY 31 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Darren Wilson thanks supporters in letter | 1:38 A letter written by Ferguson Police Officer Darren Wilson was released to KSDK-TV Monday night, after a grand jury did not indict him in the shooting death of Michael Brown. VPC 32 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Protesters tear down barricades in New York | 0:27 USA TODAY reporter Alia Dastagir takes video on the ground in New York as protesters go quickly from chanting "Hands up, don't shoot" to tearing down barricades in response to the Michael Brown grand jury decision. 33 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Rumors of violence keep Ferguson residents on edge | 1:26 Two members of the New Black Panthers have been arrested on federal firearms charges ahead of a grand jury announcement in the Michael Brown shooting. Sources say the men had explosives, and were planning to use them to hurt police. VPC 34 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Gun sales surge ahead of Ferguson announcement | 1:37 There is a surge of first-time gun owners in the St. Louis region. It is one more sign the entire area is getting ready for the grand jury announcement in the Michael Brown case. VPC 35 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Want to know more about Ferguson grand jury? Factors in its decision | 3:42 Editorial writer George Hager breaks down the workings of the Ferguson grand jury including possible charges for officer Darren Wilson, the influence of the autopsies and a summary of the case being considered. 36 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Sharpton: Ferguson situation is 'very tense' | 0:31 Civil rights activist Al Sharpton says the situation in Ferguson is 'very tense,' as the community awaits word on whether a grand jury will indict a white police officer who shot and killed Michael Brown, a young, unarmed black man. (Nov. 19) AP 37 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Ferguson nervously awaits grand jury decision | 1:56 A decision on whether Ferguson, Missouri Police Officer Darren Wilson, who is white, will be indicted for the Aug. 9 shooting death of 18-year-old Michael Brown, who is black, has the St. Louis suburb frozen in anxiety. (Nov. 18) AP 38 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Brown family attorney: Additional entry wound found | 0:59 Benjamin Crump, one of the attorneys representing the family of Michael Brown, says that according to the pathologist, there was an additional bullet entry wound in Brown's chest. VPC 39 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Officials urge calm ahead of Ferguson decision | 1:18 Top St. Louis city and county officials are urging residents to remain calm once a grand jury decision in the Michael Brown case is announced. (Nov. 12 AP 40 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Michael Brown's parents 'grateful' for international attention | 1:53 Slain Ferguson teen Michael Brown's parents are in Geneva this week, testifying at the United Nations and saying that they are "praying for an indictment' from the grand jury. VPC 41 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Missouri governor: 'Violence will not be tolerated' | 1:17 Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon said he would activate the National Guard to respond to any unrest that erupts after the grand jury delivers its decision in the case of a white Ferguson, Mo., police officer who shot and killed an unarmed black teenager. VPC 42 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Parents of Michael Brown testify before UN committee | 1:32 Human rights experts from all over the world listened to the parents of Michael Brown Tuesday as they testified before a U.N. Committee Against Torture. VPC 43 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Rally shows support for police before Ferguson decision | 1:26 Supporters of law enforcement marched in downtown St. Louis over the weekend to rally for peace before the upcoming Ferguson grand jury decision. VPC 44 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Michael Brown's new autopsy report out today | USA NOW | 1:54 The St. Louis Post-Dispatch obtained St. Louis County Medical Examiner's report of Michael Brown's autopsy. Shannon Rae Green reports on the findings from an analysis done by experts working for the Post-Dispatch. 45 of 46 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE FALLOUT FROM FERGUSON Michael Brown's blood found on officer's gun, car door | 2:08 A New York Times article offers insight into the testimony of Officer Darren Wilson, the man who shot and killed unarmed teenager Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri. VPC 46 of 46 Last VideoNext Video Ferguson protesters claim outsiders shot police

Obama weighs in on Ferguson shooting of two cops on 'Kimmel'

Holder: Ferguson police shooting 'repugnant'

2 officers shot in Ferguson out of hospital

Mo. cop injuries not expected to be long-term

Ferguson witness heard bullets 'woosh' by head

Police search Ferguson home after officer shooting

Shooting of two officers in Ferguson was an 'ambush'

Videos appear to show shooting of cops in Ferguson

Raw: Amateur video captures moment of shooting

Police Chief: Ferguson Shooter Targeted Officers

2 police officers shot during protests in Ferguson

Two police officers shot during Ferguson protests

Ferguson police chief resigns in light of DOJ report

Ferguson city manager resigns after scathing DOJ report

Ferguson judge resigns after scathing DOJ report

DOJ: Ferguson engaged in racially biased enforcement

Brown Family Atty: Ferguson Needs Solutions

Obama: 'Moment is now' to make police changes

Records reveal police wanted National Guard in Ferguson

Ferguson firefighters recount night of riot

Raw: Scuffle breaks out at St. Louis hearing

St. Louis County Police: Ferguson 'spun out of control'

Ferguson businesses struggle to recover after riots

8 candidates file to run for Ferguson City Council

Darren Wilson set to be cleared of federal charges

Gunshots slow down response to fires in Ferguson

Michael Brown charges at Officer Wilson explained in testimony

Cars burst into flames, explode at Ferguson dealership

Ferguson protesters looting, burning businesses, police cars

‘I honestly feel heart-broken’: reaction to Ferguson

Darren Wilson thanks supporters in letter

Protesters tear down barricades in New York

Rumors of violence keep Ferguson residents on edge

Gun sales surge ahead of Ferguson announcement

Want to know more about Ferguson grand jury? Factors in its decision

Sharpton: Ferguson situation is 'very tense'

Ferguson nervously awaits grand jury decision

Brown family attorney: Additional entry wound found

Officials urge calm ahead of Ferguson decision

Michael Brown's parents 'grateful' for international attention

Missouri governor: 'Violence will not be tolerated'

Parents of Michael Brown testify before UN committee

Rally shows support for police before Ferguson decision

Michael Brown's new autopsy report out today | USA NOW

Michael Brown's blood found on officer's gun, car door

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1zRDCJS