A car burns on the street in Ferguson. Reuters A St. Louis County police tactical team arrives on West Florissant Avenue to disperse a crowd as the Beauty Town store burns Nov. 24 in Dellwood, Mo. AP Photo/St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson A man steps through a vandalized store window in Ferguson. AP Reuters Getty Images Firefighters stand outside a destroyed laundromat in Ferguson. EPA A man urinates in front of a burning auto parts store in Ferguson. EPA A police car burns after being set on fire during clashes between police and protesters. Getty Images Getty Images Police chase demonstrators passing a burning police vehicle during clashes. Getty Images A fireman inspects a burning pizza restaurant. At least 11 businesses in Ferguson were burned down or damaged by flames. EPA A fashion boutique is destroyed in Ferguson. Reuters A protester in Ferguson pours milk on her face after getting tear gassed. EPA Protesters vandalize a car outside the Ferguson Police Department after the announcement of the grand jury's decision. Reuters Reuters Riot police in Ferguson Getty Images Police walk past a burning police car. Reuters Police take cover as demonstrators throw bottles at them. Getty Images Police officers confront protesters following the announcement of the grand jury's decision. AP AP Cars burn at a car dealership in Ferguson. EPA A demonstrator listens to a car radio as the grand jury's decision is delivered. Getty Images A demonstrator flashes the victory sign before a burning police car. Getty Images A protester stands with his hands on his head as a cloud of tear gas approaches. Reuters AP Police in riot gear take positions outside the Ferguson Police Department. EPA Demonstrators gather outside the police station in Ferguson as they await the grand jury's decision. Getty Images People display signs at Cudell Commons Park in Cleveland, Ohio, ahead of the grand jury's decision. Getty Images National Guard troops arrive ahead of the grand jury's announcement. Getty Images Reuters President Barack Obama makes his way off the stage after issuing remarks on the grand jury's decision. Getty Images Thousands of protesters march up Seventh Avenue through oncoming traffic to Times Square to protest the St. Louis County grand jury decision. EPA EPA Hundreds of demonstrators gather outside the White House after the Ferguson grand jury decision. Getty Images Reuters Protesters run down Interstate 5 in Seattle, Wash. AP Protesters pour milk in each other's eyes during riots in Seattle. AP Protesters in Oakland, Calif. AP A protester waves an American flag during riots in Oakland. AP Protesters march during a rally near Chicago police headquarters after the announcement. AP Asmera Smith holds up a display of people allegedly killed by police during a protest outside Chicago police headquarters before the announcement of the grand jury's decision. AP Demonstrators shout slogans during a march in St. Louis, Missouri, on Nov. 23 to protest the death of 18-year-old Michael Brown. Getty Images Mailboxes are locked across from the Buzz Westfall Justice Center in Clayton, Missouri. Getty Images Workers board up a Taco Bell restaurant in Ferguson ahead of the announcement of the grand jury's decision. Reuters Residents begin to gather at the Michael Brown memorial Tuesday. Getty Images A protester sits in a car parked across from the police department in Ferguson. AP Media satellite trucks convene outside the Buzz Westfall Justice Center in Clayton on Nov. 24. Getty Images Police officers secure an area in front of the Buzz Westfall Justice Center in Clayton, Missouri, where a grand jury has been deliberating, on Nov. 24. Getty Images Police officers gather outside the Buzz Westfall Justice Center on Nov. 24. Reuters A man holds up a sign protesting the shooting of Michael Brown outside the Ferguson police station. Reuters Ad Up Next Cricket star fights for life after sickening head shot SYDNEY — Australian cricketer Phillip Hughes is in critical condition in... 50 View Slideshow Back Continue Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Google

Facebook Messenger

WhatsApp

Email

Copy

Advertisement

The governor of Missouri ordered more National Guard troops to the battered town of Ferguson, Mo., on Tuesday after a hellish night of rioting and gunfire left at least 14 injured — including a cop — and 82 arrested.

Police were investigating whether the overnight shooting death of a man in Ferguson and the shooting of a cop in a nearby suburb were related to the riots.

The developments came as black leaders took to national TV to decry a grand jury’s decision not to indict white Ferguson cop Darren Wilson for fatally shooting unarmed Michael Brown, 18, in August.

But a relative of Wilson’s insisted that the cop isn’t racist and said he only “shot Michael Brown that day because he was in fear of his life.

“It was Michael Brown or him,” the relative told the Daily Mail. “He shot him, and he got to go home that day.”

“The grand jury made the right decision,” the source added. “[Wilson] would have shot [Brown] if he was white. He would have shot him if he was Mexican. He did not shoot Michael Brown because he was black.”

But Brown family lawyer Benjamin Crump seethed at a press conference in Ferguson that “the [grand jury] process should be indicted” and ripped what he called a longstanding “symbiotic relationship” between the prosecution and police.

He noted that Wilson “said he got hit violently,” yet he only had some redness on his ears and cheek and scratches on the back of his neck afterward.

Crump added that Wilson said he felt like it was “Hulk Hogan against a 5-year-old” during his scuffle with Brown, yet “nobody questions the officer.”

“You are 6-4, you weigh 226 pounds,” he said of Wilson. “Michael Brown is 6-6 and is 292 pounds.”

“You mean to tell me that he hit you with such force that you were describing that it was going to knock you unconscious?”

Blasting prosecutor Robert McCulloch, Crump said the government lawyer never should have been on the case.

“A first-year law student would have [done] a better job of cross-examining a killer of an unarmed person than the prosecutor’s office did,” Crump said. “Where was [Wilson’s] veracity ever challenged?”

The Rev. Al Sharpton ripped how McCulloch pointed out Brown’s role in the deadly scuffle while announcing the grand jury’s decision Monday night.

“I have been involved in civil rights all my life. We have seen cases go ways that we felt were right and ways that we felt were wrong. I have never seen a prosecutor hold a press conference to discredit the victim,” Sharpton said.

“Let the record be clear: You have broken our hearts, but you have not broken our backs. We are going to continue to pursue justice,” he said.

“I have called an emergency civil-rights leadership meeting in Washington, DC, next week,’’ Sharpton said. “In that meeting, we will determine an ongoing strategy that will include mass and regular marches, legislation and economic boycotts.”

As for the violence after the decision, “Those that acted in a destructive manner, that does not represent the spirit of Michael Brown,” Sharpton said.

“Those young people, those old people that stood no matter what the weather for over 103 days that kept going, those are the ones that have stood for Michael Brown. They are on Brown’s side. Those that burn are on their own side.”

Crump proposed the “Michael Brown Law,” under which “every police officer in every American city will have a video body camera.”

Sharpton said his National Action Network was planning protests in nearly 30 US cities — as well as economic boycotts — to make its disgust known.

At least 25 buildings were torched overnight — leaving smoldering ruins and shattered glass behind as firefighters were thwarted by flying bullets.

Hours earlier, thousands of protesters had taken to the streets — confronting throngs of armed cops in riot gear, flipping police cars and tossing Molotov cocktails.

Brown’s stepfather, Louis Head, was caught on camera screaming: “Burn this s–t down!”

Crump later called the comment “completely inappropriate.”

In New York, marches were planned everywhere from Manhattan to Staten Island to Brooklyn. One was also slated outside the federal courthouse in Newark, NJ.

Civil rights leaders vowed Tuesday to continue protesting the decision — with further marches planned in and around the St. Louis suburb.

“My reaction is one of deep sorrow, pain — this grand jury decision represents salt in the wound of a brutal injustice,” said NAACP President Cornell William Brooks on Tuesday on “CBS This Morning.”

Brooks said his group is planning to launch a protest march from Brown’s house to the home of Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon.

New York Rep. Greg Meeks accused McCulloch of manipulating the facts to prevent an indictment.

“It seems as though the prosecutor went into the grand jury wanting an outcome and that outcome being a no true bill,” Meeks said on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.”

But former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani — who has come under fire for making racially charged comments about the case over the weekend — sniffed to CNN that prosecutors “could have never won this case.

“This riot you see today would have taken place six months from now when the officer’s acquitted by a jury,” insisted Giuliani, a former prosecutor.

“If you can’t prove probable cause, how are you going to prove it beyond a reasonable doubt when the witnesses are contradicting themselves?”

Still, US Attorney General Eric Holder has cautioned that while the criminal case against Wilson might be closed, “The Justice Department’s investigation into the shooting of Michael Brown remains ongoing.”

Holder’s agency still has two investigations into the case — one probing whether Wilson violated Brown’s civil rights in the shooting and the other into the general policing practices in Ferguson.

In other breaking developments late Monday into Tuesday: