“I have to live here,” said Ms. Turner, who identified herself as a single mother. “I have no help. I’m a good woman.”

Mr. Underwood speculated that someone might have seen him and Ms. Turner speeding away from the protest scene and reported it to the police.

On Thursday, the St. Louis County Police Department and the Missouri State Highway Patrol assumed responsibility for security in Ferguson, just as they did after the unrest following the shooting of the teenager, Michael Brown Jr., by a white police officer, Darren Wilson. A grand jury did not indict the officer, and the Justice Department also declined to bring charges.

Slide Show

The two police officers were shot shortly after midnight during a protest in front of the police station after the chief, Thomas Jackson, announced his resignation. His departure was the most recent in a shake-up of the city’s most senior administrators after a recent Justice Department report that described a city that used its legal system to generate revenue, in the process violating constitutional rights and disproportionately targeting blacks.

Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. denounced the shootings as “heinous and cowardly attacks.”

“This was not someone trying to bring healing to Ferguson,” Mr. Holder said at a news conference in Washington.

Community organizers extended sympathy to the officers who were shot, while trying to keep the focus on their own longstanding complaints.

“As frequent victims of violence, we certainly understand the pain of these senseless acts,” said the Rev. Traci Blackmon of Christ the King Church of Christ in nearby Florissant.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Gov. Jay Nixon visited, his motorcade rolling past the site of the shootings that he called, in a statement, “cowardly and reprehensible.”

Fire Department Where police officers were shot People were in these parking lots at the time of the shooting. Ferguson Police Department s. florissant rd. Home searched by the police Ferguson 1/4 mile

The shootings came at a vulnerable time, just as the city was making “good-faith steps,” as Mr. Holder put it, to restore faith in its criminal justice system. In a statement, the City of Ferguson said it was “diligently working to make systematic changes necessary to instill confidence,” but added, “We cannot continue to move forward under threats of violence and destruction.”

With the issue of police shootings bringing political polarization, Mr. Holder, who has been at the forefront of the effort to bring change to Ferguson’s policing, came in for some criticism.

“There’s an atmosphere of unbalance here,” Rudolph W. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York, said on Fox News, blaming the Justice Department for emphasizing the faults of the Ferguson Police Department without saying that the officer who fatally shot Mr. Brown last August “did exactly what he should do.”

The late-night protest on Wednesday started as a celebration of Chief Jackson’s resignation, but also as a call for more action.

“Not just Jackson, we want Knowles, Ferguson has got to go!” the demonstrators yelled in reference to James Knowles III, the mayor.

Video

When the shots echoed through the crisp air, striking the two officers, demonstrators and police officers hit the ground. Many people ran for cover, and police officers clad in riot gear dragged their wounded comrades to safety.

“We’re lucky by God’s grace we didn’t lose two officers last night,” Chief Belmar said at a midmorning news conference. It was clear that the police were the targets, he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Based on the sound of the shots and the officers’ wounds, he said, the weapon was a handgun, not a rifle.

The officers who were shot were standing side by side, part of a cordon from multiple police departments, keeping protesters away from the police station. There had been as many as 69 officers in the evening, dwindling to about 50 at the time of the shooting, Chief Belmar said.

One of the wounded officers was from the Webster Groves Police Department. He is 32 and a seven-year veteran of the force. The other was from the St. Louis County Police and is 41 with 14 years’ experience, the county police said. Both were treated at Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis.

Photo

The younger officer was shot in the cheekbone, just below his right eye, and the bullet lodged behind his right ear, Chief Belmar said. A bullet struck the other officer in the right shoulder and exited his back on the right side. No officers returned fire. The officers were released from a hospital Thursday morning.

Chief Belmar said that people had a right to protest peacefully, but also that “there is an unfortunate association with that gathering” and the shooting.

Witnesses among the demonstrators denied any link to the shootings, saying that they believed the shots originated from the top of a hill about 220 yards directly opposite the station. Chief Belmar did not specify a location but estimated the distance at 125 yards.

“There’s just no way anybody I know did that,” said Bob Hudgins, a protester who is running for City Council. “Nobody’s happy about this today.”

The Brown family, in a statement from its lawyer, denounced “the actions of stand-alone agitators” who tried to derail the protests. “We reject any kind of violence directed toward members of law enforcement,” the statement said. “It cannot and will not be tolerated.”

Chief Belmar said the shooting realized his worst fears over the months of unrest since Mr. Brown’s killing. He drew a parallel to the fatal shooting in December of two New York City police officers, Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu, by a man who said he was enraged by killings by the police, including Mr. Brown’s.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We were very close to having happen what happened to N.Y.P.D.,” Chief Belmar said.