Demonstrators in Ferguson, Mo. gathered on Wednesday for another round of protests over the death of Michael Brown, an unarmed teenager who was killed over the weekend by a police officer. Mr. Brown’s death has triggered days of protests that have brought national attention to racial tension between the police and the African-American community in the St. Louis suburb.

The protesters showed up in droves, marching along the streets near where Mr. Brown was gunned down and staying well into the night. They were met by heavily armed riot police and SWAT teams in armored cars in scenes that were captured in photos and videos on social media with hashtags like #MikeBrown and #Ferguson.

In a nighttime protest that was streamed live online, protesters could be heard chanting “We ain’t leaving until we have justice.” A line of police officers appeared to move closer to the crowd and fire what appeared to be rubber bullets and tear gas canisters, then set off sound cannons. A man narrating the video said the protest was peaceful and the attack was unprovoked. (Warning: the video contains strong language.)

Fox 2 St. Louis, the local television station, shared a similar video clip.

Tim Norman, the co-owner of Sweetie Pie’s, a trio of comfort food restaurants in St. Louis, posted a picture of a rubber bullet that he said was fired on a crowd that included women and children.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The violent turn followed protests in the day that featured bands and children chanting.

Maria Chappelle-Nadal, a state senator, joined demonstrators staging a sit-in on W. Florissant Avenue, a major roadway.

By nightfall, the scene had grown tense as protesters refused to comply with the police’s demands that they leave the streets, and the police responded with force.

The police said protesters threw bottles and Molotov cocktails at officers. At least 10 people were arrested.

Two reporters said they were working inside a McDonald’s when the police arrived and arrested them for trespassing. The reporters, Wesley Lowery of The Washington Post and Ryan J. Reilly of The Huffington Post, said on Twitter that they were roughed up by the officers, who refused to provide their names and badges or answer questions. The reporters said they were released without charges or an explanation.