FIFA Secretary General Jérôme Valcke and Brazil’s Deputy Sports Minister Luis Fernandes officially opened the International Broadcasting Centre for the 2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil™ on 2 June.



The IBC, located at the Riocentro complex in Rio de Janeiro, is the nerve centre for the FIFA TV production of Brazil 2014, providing billions of fans around the globe with all the action and emotion of the world’s biggest single-sports event. More than three billion people watched coverage of South Africa 2010.



“This is our link to the world,” Valcke told reporters at the opening ceremony. “From here the world will all connect to the World Cup.”



For the landmark event on the road to the World Cup, Valcke and Fernandes were joined by the Governor of the State of Rio de Janeiro Luiz Fernando Pezão, the Mayor of Rio de Janeiro Eduardo Paes, Ministry of Communications Executive Secretary Genildo Lins, FIFA Director of TV Niclas Ericson and the CEO of the 2014 FIFA World Cup Local Organising Committee Ricardo Trade.

Thanks to the IBC, the images from the World Cup will reach half the world’s population. Luis Fernandes, Brazil’s Deputy Sports Minister

The IBC is the hub that helps make the World Cup a truly global competition. FIFA invests in the broadcast production of the competition to ensure that audiences everywhere can enjoy the very best in sports coverage, from the latest visual technology to a wide range of multimedia offerings.



FIFA TV production crews at all 64 matches in Brazil will beam images back to the IBC, where feeds will be delivered to FIFA’s Media Rights Licensees for broadcast in all territories.



The creation of the IBC has meant key improvements to connectivity across Brazil which will remain as part of improved infrastructure for the Brazilian economy, including optic fibre links across the Amazon region.



“This is an important part of the legacy of the World Cup,” Fernandes said.

Spanning 55,000 square metres, the IBC functions like a broadcasting village, with studios, power, telecommunications, shops, lounges and restaurants serving the needs of thousands of broadcast personnel from around the globe who have come to work at the World Cup. “Thanks to the IBC, the images from the World Cup will reach half the world’s population."



There are 17 TV studios for Media Rights Licensees ranging up to 400 square metres, work spaces for 86 MRLs, more than 70 miles of primary and secondary electrical cable, 350 40 inch HD screens and a 6,000 square metre satellite farm in a structure that took five months to assemble. It will take seven weeks to dismantle the facility after the final match.