A Brazilian police officer was filmed firing what appear to be live rounds at anti-World Cup protesters this weekend.

The incident was captured by the Associated Press close to Rio de Janeiro’s Maracana stadium during the Argentina vs Bosnia-Herzegovina match on Sunday.

The scenes also saw a man in plain clothes who identified himself as a police officer fire two shots into the air. He continued firing as he was driven away. The news agency was not able to confirm his identity.

Scroll down for more pictures

SUBSCRIBE AND FOLLOW Get top stories and blog posts emailed to me each day. Newsletters may offer personalized content or advertisements. Learn more Newsletter Please enter a valid email address Thank you for signing up! You should receive an email to confirm your subscription shortly. There was a problem processing your signup; please try again later Facebook

Twitter

Instagram

Podcast

Snapchat

Google+

Pinterest

CLOSE

Protesters were met by walls of riot police during the incident on Sunday close to Rio de Janeiro's Maracana stadium

Karen Rodrigues, a 23-year-old student who took part in the demonstration told the AP: “We’re seeing tonight the same police brutality we’ve seen during the past year and that’s why we have to keep protesting.”

Around 200 people took part in the protest and were met by walls of military police dressed in riot gear. Tear gas was also fired into the crowds.

Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff urged her country to separate football and politics.

The tournament is projected to cost the country $14bn and has been a strain on public finances and opinion.

This man identified himself as a plainclothes police officer after he was fronted with officers in riot gear

Some residents have turned to artistic protest – daubing walls with anti-Fifa graffiti.

These powerful images show a nation discontent with corruption, greed and injustice.

One mural in particular, at a Sao Paulo school by renowned street artist Paulo Ito, has gone viral on social media, showing a weeping, starving Brazilian boy, knife and fork in hand, being served a football on a plate.