Iran 0-0 Nigeria: Super Eagles play out World Cup's first goalless draw

Iran and Nigeria play out first goalless draw of World Cup 2014

Stalemate sees Iran earn first ever clean sheet at a World Cup finals

Draw means Bosnia and Herzegovina are now favourites to qualify from Group F behind Argentina

Iran - Nigeria: Match Zone

CLICK HERE to view our brilliant Match Zone service including John Obi Mikel's heat map

It had to end sometime. The steady stream of goals and entertaining football in Brazil was always going to run dry at some point, and no-one will be particularly surprised that it happened in Curitiba’s Arena da Baixada between these two nations on Monday night.

The first draw of the World Cup – and a goalless one at that – leaves Bosnia and Herzegovina favourites to qualify from Group F behind Argentina if they can avoid defeat to Nigeria in Cuiaba on Saturday.

The reigning African champions knew that this was arguably their best chance of a first World Cup win in nine attempts going back to 1998 when Iran also celebrated their solitary victory over the USA, but Stephen Keshi’s side were desperately disappointing.

Battle: Nigeria's John Obi Mikel comes out with the ball after dispossessing Iran's Reza Ghoochannejhad Instructions: Iran coach Carlos Quieroz watches on from the touchline as the side's played out a goalless draw Challenge: Nigeria's Emmanuel Emenike (left) and Iran's Jalal Hosseini battle for the ball On the run: Iran wideman Ashkan Dejagah evades the tackle of Nigeria's Ahmed Musa

MATCH FACTS

Iran: Haghighi 6.5; Hosseini 5.5, Montazeri 6, Sadeghi 6.5, Pooladi 7; Nekounam 7.5; Heydari 6.5 (Shojaei 89), Timotian 6.5, Haji Safi 6.5, Dejagah 7 (Bakhash 6.5); Ghoochannejad 7.

Subs not used: Alenemeh, Beikzadeh, Davari, Beitashour, Hadadifar, Mahini, Rahmani, Ansari, Ahmadi, Jahanbakhsh. Booked: Teymourian. Nigeria: Enyeama 6.5; Ambrose 5.5, Oshaniwa 6, Oboabona 5.5 (Yobo 29, 6), Omeruo 6; Onazi 5.5, Azeez 5 (Odemwingie 69, 6.5), Mikel 5.5; Moses 4.5 (Ameobi 52, 6.5), Emenike 5.5, Musa 7.

Subs not used: Ejide, Uchebo, Nwofor, Agbim, Egwuek, Gabriel, Uzoenyi, Odunlam, Babatun. Referee: Carlos Vera (Ecuador) 6.5 Star man: Javad Nekounam Attendance: 38, 081. *Player ratings from CHRIS WHEELER from the Arena da Baixada.



Iran, on the other hand, came for a draw and will be delighted that they got one. Coach Carlos Queiroz has bristled at suggestions in recent days that his team are negative but they did what they do best; keep a clean sheet.

They arrived at the World Cup with more of them than any other qualifier – although it has to be pointed out that their opponents on the road to Brazil included Maldives, Qatar and Lebanon.

Nigeria, meanwhile, had scored fewer goals than everyone else, so it hardly had the hallmarks of a classic.

The Super Eagles started with an attacking intent but ran out of ideas as the match wore on. The pedestrian approach of Chelsea’s Jon Obi Mikel summed up their play and Liverpool’s Victor Moses was a major disappointment.

His replacement just seven minutes into the second half, Shola Ameobi, went close with two headers and Peter Odemwingie added fresh impetus when he came off the bench for Ramon Azeez towards the end, but Nigeria simply did not carry nearly enough of a threat.

They actually had the ball in the net as early as the seventh minute through the lively Ahmed Musa, but Ecuadorian referee Carlos Vera ruled it out for a foul on goalkeeper Alireza Haghighi by Mikel.

