Story highlights Brazilian government trying to overcome security problems with big investment

It is allocating $900 million to security out of a $15 billion infrastructure budget

Soccer's ruling body has expressed concerns about crime wave in Sao Paulo

Brazil says it is learning lessons from previous big events such as Winter Olympics

Brazil is hoping to make the 2014 World Cup "one of the most protected sports events in history," the government said on Wednesday as it announced a $900 million investment in its security forces.

It plans to have one police officer for every 50 people attending the soccer matches, and one for every 80 people at public viewing events around the country.

"The government has made a program to compile the measures needed for everyone's security. This is an item that we face with much importance," said sports minister Aldo Rebelo.

World football's ruling body FIFA has expressed concerns about Brazil's increasing crime rate, particularly in Sao Paulo, as well as worries that the South American nation's infrastructure is behind schedule.

"We are seeing a big wave of crime in Sao Paulo, which is not good for its image or tourism," FIFA general secretary Jerome Valcke said last month.

JUST WATCHED Police killings rock Sao Paulo Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Police killings rock Sao Paulo 02:22

JUST WATCHED Sau Paulo's traffic problems Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Sau Paulo's traffic problems 02:29

JUST WATCHED Police raid Rio shantytowns Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Police raid Rio shantytowns 01:30

Rebelo said the issues are being addressed.

"The Sao Paulo government adopted measures and responses for security together with the federal government, who offered help. The actions are being adopted together for the World Cup," he said.

Valcke made few friends in Brazil earlier this year when he criticized the lack of progress being made in providing sufficient hotels and transport facilities, and was forced to apologize.

He said last month that the problems remain, but acknowledged that steps are being taken.

"In one unnamed city there are 17,000 hotel bedrooms and a 45,000 capacity stadium," said Valcke, suggesting that tourists may struggle to find accommodation. "But we have now moved from talking about the problems to talking about the solutions."

The Brazil World Cup bid team has increased its security budget as the country prepares to host the tournament for the first time since 1950, as well as next year's precursor Confederations Cup and the 2016 Summer Olympics.

It is investing in hi-tech vehicles, helicopters and surveillance equipment, with the $900 million to be spent coming from a wider $15 billion budget for infrastructure.

"Security has become an ever-increasing issue for major sporting events in the past decade," the World Cup organizers said in a statement.

"This has increased the level of information exchange between countries that have recently hosted events to ensure public safety."

The last World Cup was held in South Africa, another country with crime problems. Its government said it invested 640 million rand ($70 million) to deploy 31,000 police officials during the tournament.

Photos: Spain 2012 vs. Brazil 1970: Who's the greatest? Photos: Spain 2012 vs. Brazil 1970: Who's the greatest? On top of the world – Pele (top) leaps on his teammates during Brazil's 4-1 victory over Italy in the 1970 World Cup final. The Brazil team of that tournament, which clinched a third World Cup triumph, is often heralded as one of the finest in football history. Hide Caption 1 of 5 Photos: Spain 2012 vs. Brazil 1970: Who's the greatest? Six of the best – Brazil's glorious 1970 campaign also owed much to Jairzinho, the powerful forward who scored in all six of his country's matches -- only the third man to achieve the feat at a World Cup. During the 1970 tournament, Brazil averaged a stunning 3.2 goals per game. Hide Caption 2 of 5 Photos: Spain 2012 vs. Brazil 1970: Who's the greatest? Saint Iker – Captain Iker Casillas was a key part of Spain's Euro 2012-winning team. The goalkeeper was also in Spain's teams of 2008 and 2010 and was one of the reasons La Roja conceded just one goal in six games in Poland and Ukraine. Hide Caption 3 of 5 Photos: Spain 2012 vs. Brazil 1970: Who's the greatest? 'Xaviesta' – Spain's midfield pairing of Andres Iniesta (left) and Xavi (right) have epitomised the team's passing-based style. The Barcelona pair have been much-heralded throughout Spain's recent triumphs, with Iniesta being named the best player at Euro 2012. Hide Caption 4 of 5 Photos: Spain 2012 vs. Brazil 1970: Who's the greatest? Great expectations – Brazil will feel the weight of expectation when the World Cup is hosted in the country in 2014. One of the stars of the current Brazil team is forward Neymar, who has consistently been linked with a move away from Santos. Hide Caption 5 of 5

Photos: Samba star Neymar Photos: Samba star Neymar A samba star is born – Neymar made his debut for the Brazil national team in August 2010 against the U.S. in New Jersey. The 18-year-old marked his first match for the five-time world champions with a goal in Brazil's 2-0 win. Hide Caption 1 of 6 Photos: Samba star Neymar Libertadores leader – Neymar played a crucial role in Santos' Copa Libertadores triumph in 2011. After a goalless first leg against Uruguayan side Penarol, Neymar scored and was named man of the match in Santos' 2-1 second-leg win. It was the first time Santos had been crowned South American champions since the legendary Pele was playing for the team during the 1960s. Hide Caption 2 of 6 Photos: Samba star Neymar Pele's protege? – Neymar has drawn comparisons with Pele, who also came through the Santos youth academy and is widely regarded as one of the greatest footballers of all time. Pele won two Copa Libertadores with Santos and the World Cup with Brazil on three occasions. Hide Caption 3 of 6 Photos: Samba star Neymar Rivaling Ronaldinho? – Neymar is the latest in a long line of exciting Brazilian talent. Here he is pictured next to Ronaldinho, the two-time FIFA World Player of the Year who won the World Cup with Brazil in 2002 and the European Champions League with Barcelona in 2006. He is now back in Brazil with Flamengo. Hide Caption 4 of 6 Photos: Samba star Neymar Carnival! – The carnival in Rio de Janeiro is world-famous festival which is held each year before the Christian period of Lent. The carnival is characterized by flamboyant dancing and extravagant floats, and Neymar has been spotted partying in recent times. Hide Caption 5 of 6 Photos: Samba star Neymar Strutting his stuff – Like Neymar, Ronaldinho also enjoys letting loose during the carnival. He is pictured here dancing with a samba school in Rio during the 2011 carnival. Hide Caption 6 of 6

Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' Brazilian chemical firm Braskem leads the way in the production of green plastics alternatives derived from sugarcane. Hide Caption 1 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' Braskem hopes its "sugar seats" will be used in football stadiums when Brazil hosts the 2014 World Cup. Hide Caption 2 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' It is hoping to extend its bio production with the launch of a new plant in 2013. Hide Caption 3 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' The company's existing green plant in the southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul is the first of its kind, says corporate marketing director Frank Alcantara. Hide Caption 4 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' Alcantara says most of Braskem's sugarcane is grown in the state of Sao Paulo, which is a long way from the protected Amazon rainforest. Hide Caption 5 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' Brazil has been producing ethanol from sugarcane since the 1970s, and Braskem has built on this technology in recent years. Hide Caption 6 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' It has a deal to install its "sugar seats" at Amsterdam ArenA, home of Ajax football club. Dignitaries signed up at 11 a.m. on November 11, 2011 -- which was Sustainability Day in the Netherlands. Hide Caption 7 of 8 Photos: Going green with 'sugar seats' Initially 2,000 green chairs will be put in, but in time all 54,000 seats will be made from the eco plastic. Hide Caption 8 of 8

It set aside a total budget of R1.3 billion ($150 million) for security, and said after the 2010 event it had spent R572 million ($65 million) on crowd control equipment, crime scene trainers, helicopters, water cannons, new body armor and 100 BMWs for highway patrol.

More recently, the British government budgeted £553 million ($890 million) on security for the London 2012 Olympics, plus £475 million ($760 million) for army, security services and police spending. It caused outrage with plans to put anti-terrorist rocket launchers on the roofs of civilian homes.

Brazil has been taking advice from Canada, which hosted the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.

"That's how it should be done, as we did: learn from those who were in charge of security for other events before us," Royal Canadian Mounted Police superintendent Kevin Bruyckere said.

"It's important to make the most of what others have done previously to plan security. The relationship between countries and the law enforcement agencies of these countries is very important. I know Brazil is working closely with the international community."