Diego Maradona has accused Fifa of discriminating against World Cup sensations Costa Rica after seven of their players were drug tested after they qualified for the knockout stage.

Argentine legend Maradona claimed the central Americans had been targeted by post-match doping control amid fears tournament sponsors would not pay as much following their progress to the last 16 at the expense of England and one of Italy and Uruguay .

Fifa confirmed on Saturday that five Costa Rica squad members had been tested following their shock Group D victory over the Italians on Friday, in addition to the two players required from either side after each game.

The world governing body admitted the five unnamed stars were targeted, but only because they were among the nine per cent of players in Brazil unavailable for pre-tournament testing as part of its new biological passport programme.

That did not wash with Maradona - the only player ever to have failed a World Cup drugs test after being sent home from the 1994 tournament for taking a cocktail of banned products, including ephedrine.

Accusing Fifa of a “lack of respect for the rules”, the 1986 World Cup-winning captain said: “Why test seven players from Costa Rica and not seven from Italy?”

Hinting at a conspiracy against the central Americans, who play already-eliminated England on Tuesday after stunning Uruguay and Italy in their opening two games, Maradona suggested they had come under scrutiny because of indirect pressure from sponsors.

He added: “This is only happening because some people are annoyed Costa Rica - and not the big teams - are going through, and so the sponsors won’t pay what they’d promised.

“It is against the rules. Two players from each team are supposed to undergo doping controls. I know what I’m talking about, because it happened to me. But seven players? I’ve never seen something like that.”

Fifa’s head of media, Delia Fischer, yesterday described the mass screening of Costa Ricans as “standard procedure”.

Testing for its biological passport programme began in March, focusing initially on those players most likely to travel to Brazil.