Workman fell to his death helping to install seats at the Sao Paulo stadium where Brazil will play the opener on 12 June

A worker died Saturday after falling at the construction site of the stadium that will host the World Cup opener in Sao Paulo, marking the seventh death in accidents at World Cup venues in Brazil.

Fabio Hamilton da Cruz, whose age was not disclosed, fell about 8 metres (26ft) while helping install temporary seats at the Itaquerao stadium, construction company Fast Engenharia said in a statement. Firefighters said the worker fell from about 15m.

The press office of the Hospital Santa Marcelina in Sao Paulo confirmed the death, saying the worker did not survive serious head injuries. He was pronounced dead just before he was expected to undergo surgery.



Details on the accident were not immediately released, but Fast Engenharia said the worker was wearing all the required safety equipment at the time of the fall.

Brazil's sports minister, Aldo Rebelo, released a statement lamenting the death and saying officials were awaiting results from an investigation into what happened.

FIFA secretary general Jerome Valcke said on his Twitter account that he was "deeply saddened by the tragic loss of a worker".

FIFA and the local World Cup organising committee said in a statement that they were waiting for the official report on the death.

"For FIFA, the LOC and the Brazilian authorities safety is paramount," the statement said.

The accident comes about four months after two workers died when a crane collapsed at the stadium while hoisting a 500-tonne piece of roofing.

It was the eighth death at World Cup venues so far, the seventh in accidents. Three workers died in the Arena da Amazonia in the jungle city of Manaus, including a 55-year-old Portuguese man killed while disassembling a crane that was used to install the stadium's roof earlier this year. Another worker there died of a heart attack.

In 2012, a worker died at the construction site of the stadium in the nation's capital, Brasilia.

Construction was already behind schedule in Sao Paulo because of the damage caused by the earlier accident in late November, when the roofing structure fell on part of the stadium's facade.

FIFA said it was expecting the venue to be finished in mid-May, about a month before the June 12 opener, but it wasn't clear if Saturday's incident would prompt further delays.

About 20,000 temporary seats were being added to the new stadium to increase its capacity for the high-profile inaugural match between host Brazil and Croatia.

Construction at Brazil stadiums has been plagued by delays and three venues remain unfinished less than three months before the opener. The other two stadiums under construction are the Arena Pantanal, in the city of Cuiaba, and the Arena da Baixada, in the southern city of Curitiba, where a test event took place on Saturday, with Atletico Paranaense and J.Malucelli playing out a goalless draw in front of about 10,000 fans.

The friendly was not considered an official FIFA test event and construction work is expected to continue at full pace to try to finish the stadium in time for the World Cup in less than three months.

Only 10,000 people could attend the match because of security reasons. The stadium's capacity will be about 41,000 during the World Cup, when the venue will host four group-stage matches: Spain-Australia on June 23, Iran-Nigeria on June 16, Honduras-Ecuador on June 20 and Algeria-Russia on June 26.