Police detained 85 Chilean supporters after they breached security and stormed Rio de Janeiro’s Maracana stadium before a World Cup match against Spain.

The fans broke through the security perimeter, stormed the media center, shattered the main glass door and rushed inside the stadium, the second time supporters broke through security at the iconic arena that will host the final on July 13. A group of Argentine fans breached security before a June 15 game with Bosnia-Herzegovina. Chilean fans didn’t reach the stadium seats, soccer’s governing body FIFA said in a statement.

“They were contained by the security and did not make it to their seats,” FIFA and the organizing committee said in a joint statement. “The organizers of the FIFA World Cup condemn these acts of violence and we will communicate further information and measures to be taken in due course.’’

The breach occurred after a Chilean fan pretended to be sick to distract a guard manning one of the gates. As he left his post, scores of Chilean fans ran into the stadium, said a FIFA spokeswomen.

Chile eliminated reigning champions Spain following a 2-0 victory in both teams’ second match. Its fans made up the majority of the 74,101 inside the Maracana.

An ING survey showed Chileans would pay more money than any other nation for their team to win the World Cup. Chileans would be willing to part with 526 euros ($714), compared with 429 euros in neighboring Argentina, according to the survey of about 8,000 people in 15 countries. Last night Chileans gathered on Copacabana’s beach-side Avenue Atlantica, chanting “Chi-chi-chi! Le-le-le!” past 3 a.m.

About 150,000 police and military personnel and 20,000 private security guards are staffing the monthlong tournament. State and federal police had to be drafted in to man some entrances in Fortaleza yesterday before Brazil’s 0-0 draw with Mexico after a local security provider failed to deliver on promises, Saint-Clair Milesi, a spokesman for the World Cup organizing committee, said today.