It was, appropriately enough, the most scrappy and least aesthetically pleasing goal of Germany's magnificent seven against Brazil on Tuesday. Yet it was also easily the most significant.

Beneath the collective narrative of the hosts succumbing to the World Cup's most spectacular defeat, a major moment of individual history was almost forgotten. Miroslav Klose might not have much pace, he might lack power, dribbling skills, a silky touch or even stellar shooting ability, but he also now stands alone, above such legends as Pele, Gerd Muller and Ronaldo, as the World Cup's greatest-ever goal scorer with 16.

Having become the first man to play in four semifinals, he is also now preparing for a second final. His characteristics of mental strength, efficiency and reliability on the big stage, retain huge value to a squad of vast talent that has yet to conclusively prove it knows how to win on the ultimate stage.

"Miroslav is very important for us, as you could see from when he scored and how he behaves all the time during the tournament," said centre-back Per Mertesacker.

"He will be the only player who reached the final before. For anyone else it's a new experience."

That Joachim Low will almost certainly start with the 36-year-old Klose, rather than be swayed by the dazzling form of Andre Schurrle, says everything not just for his dressingroom influence but also how he so perfectly complements Germany's system.

Even Schurrle, despite admitting that he is "desperate" to play, seems to accept Low's thinking. "The manager talks a lot with me and says I'm important because he needs someone who can change the game," said Schurrle. "This is my role for this World Cup. We're in the final. I've scored three goals, so I'm happy."

The great anomaly is that there is no real clue to Klose's extraordinary international record - he has now scored 71 times for Germany - within a relatively ordinary club career. So what makes Klose so transformed whenever he puts on a Germany shirt?

The uncharitable answer is that he has benefited from the stellar service of Thomas Muller, Toni Kroos, Mesut Ozil and company during an era when there has been little direct competition in the specialist striker's role. Yet that explanation would unfairly overlook Klose's biggame temperament, heading ability and an unerring knack -like Gary Lineker - of being in the right place at the right time.