World champions Spain are out of the 2014 World Cup following their 2-0 defeat to Chile, with goals from Eduardo Vargas and Charles Aranguiz sending home Vicente Del Bosque's side. But they are certainly not the first reigning champions to leave the competition early.

After their historic 1-0 win over the Netherlands four years ago in South Africa, La Roja experienced humiliation of the highest level after shock defeats to the Netherlands and Chile.

Many have commented that it is the end of 'tiki-taka' as we know it, but Spain are certainly not the first and won't be the last to relinquish their crown at the first attempt of defending it.

In fact, Spain join two other nations in the 21st Century who have crashed out at the group stage the tournament after winning the World Cup - France in 2002 and Italy in 2010.

But Spain are the only champions to have lost their first two games the tournament after winning it.

It has been a tournament to forget for Spain, and for the likes of Xavi, Xabi Alonso and Iker Casillas, it marks a disappointing end to their incredible international career.

Here are the other nations who went from the highest of highs to humiliation within two tournaments.

Italy (1950)

The Italians won the 1938 World Cup but, due to World War II, were unable to defend their crown until 12 years later. And even then, they were severely weakened by the fact that some members of their squad were killed in the Superga air disaster the year before the tournament started. They were put in a group with Paraguay, Sweden and India (who later withdrew), and lost their opening game 3-2 to Sweden, who went through.

Brazil (1966)

Even with the likes of Pele and Tostao in the side, Brazil could not live up to the expectations of them and subsequently failed to make it past the group stages in the 1966 World Cup. Their group, containing Hungary, Portugal and Bulgaria, was one filled with goals, and Brazil's 3-1 defeat to Portugal condemned them to failure in England, who went on to win their first and only World Cup.

Spain 0 Chile 2 player ratings







22 show all Spain 0 Chile 2 player ratings









































1/22 Spain: Iker Casillas 5/10 Another nightmare showing from the Spanish captain. Looked frail at set-pieces and was to blame for Chile’s second. Is this his last major tournament with with his country? Getty images

2/22 Cesar Azpilicueta 6 Did very little after a surprise call-up to the Spanish starting eleven. Gave possession away far too cheaply and looked out of place. Getty images

3/22 Sergio Ramos 6 Constantly striving to get forward, as well as defending well, Ramos at least showed an intent to halter Spain’s slide. Getty images

4/22 Javi Martinez 6 While not doing too much wrong, Martinez failed to excel when Spain needed a leader. Getty images

5/22 Jordi Alba 6 Ran the line reasonably well but was left wanting defensively on far too many occasions. Had a difficult afternoon trying to contain Alexis Sanchez. Getty images

6/22 Xabi Alonso 5 The former Liverpool man had an awful first half, surrendering possession far too easily. A number of wild shots, which blazed over the bar, summed up his country’s night. Getty images

7/22 Sergio Busquets 5 The Barcelona midfielder will ultimately be remembered for that horrendous miss in the second half. Offered little else. Getty images

8/22 Pedro 6 Had a quiet evening when much was required from him if Spain were to get back into the game. Will be bitterly disappointed with his distribution tonight. Getty images

9/22 David Silva 6 Went missing for large periods of the game but did improve towards the end of his shift. Could have made the difference if luck went his way. Getty images

10/22 Andres Iniesta 6 While his undeniable class was evident throughout, Iniesta’s passing didn’t penetrate the Chilean defence nearly enough. An ineffective evening. Getty images

11/22 Diego Costa 5 A poor performance from a striker who looks severely out of place in the Spanish set-up. His game, built on power and pace, doesn’t match up with the philosophy in which he has been expected to embrace. Getty images

12/22 Chile: Claudio Bravo 8 While consciously adding an air of the spectacular to his saves, Bravo made a range of excellent stops to keep Spain out. A fine display from an exciting goalkeeper. Bravo indeed.

13/22 Mauricio Isla 7 Racing forwards at every opportunity, Chile’s right-back has made something of a name for himself tonight. Chileans, however, won’t be surprised by his display tonight.

14/22 Eugenio Mena 7 Like his counterpart on the other side of Chile’s defence, Isla, the Santos left-back offered an attacking threat as well as defensive solidity.

15/22 Gonzalo Jara 7 A rock at the heart of Chile’s backline, the former Nottingham Forest defender earned his stripes by keeping the likes of Diego Costa at bay.

16/22 Gary Medel 7 Playing in his more familiar position at centre-back, despite being used in midfield for Cardiff City, Medal wore his heart on his sleeve and made a couple of essential interceptions.

17/22 Francisco Silva 7 Offering a springboard for Chile to leap into attack from, Silva often stayed back and manned the fort. Giving the players around him the freedom to run at the Spanish defence, he played a vital role this evening.

18/22 Charles Aranguiz 8 Scoring Chile’s second and proving to be a constant thorn in Spain’s side, this was a marvellous performance defined by his electric pace. A true shame he couldn’t stay on the pitch.

19/22 Marcelo Diaz 7 The FC Basel man was an essential cog in Chile’s well-oiled, and well drilled, midfield. Kept his teammates grounded when they may have become over exuberant.

20/22 Arturo Vidal 8 An impressive performance from Juventus’ 27-year-old star man. Representing all that Chile stand for, Vidal held up the ball superbly and wasn’t afraid to run with it.

21/22 Alexis Sanchez 9 A menace throughout, the occasionally maligned Barcelona playmaker was at the top of his game today. Unlucky not to score from one of his many opportunities.

22/22 Eduardo Vargas 8 After putting his side ahead early into the game, Vargas then became more defensively-minded and did an important job in holding the ball up until the cavalry could catch up. An effective display.

France (2002)

A shock 1-0 defeat to Senegal in the opening game of the 2002 World Cup in Korea and Japan showed a sign of things to come for France. After their incredible 3-0 win over Brazil in 1998, the weight of expectation proved to be too much for the reigning champions. They ended the tournament winless after being defeated by Denmark and a goalless draw with Uruguay which saw Thierry Henry infamously sent off.

Italy (2010)

A group that Italy were more than capable of getting out of turned into their worst nightmare as Marcelo Lippi's side were eliminated from the World Cup. Their opponents - Paraguay, Slovakia and debutants New Zealand - surprised the Azzurri, with the latter side picking up a 1-1 draw. A 3-2 defeat to Slovakia compounded Italy's exit, although France's equal level of underachievement meant that Italy's poor showing went somewhat under the radar.

Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.