When the next edition of the FIFA World Cup™ kicks off in Brazil in 2014, the excitement will not be limited to the stadiums hosting the matches. FIFA and the Local Organising Committee (LOC) have been working together with the twelve Brazilian Host Cities to plan the FIFA Fan Fest programme which will come to life in iconic locations throughout Brazil. One major milestone of the planning has been reached today with the twelve FIFA Fan Fest locations confirmed by the Host Cities.



“The FIFA Fan Fest symbolises the most exciting part of football and the FIFA World Cup: thousands of fans gathered to watch a match together and celebrate,” said Ronaldo, member of the Local Organising Committee Management Board. “The FIFA Fan Fest brings together people from all social backgrounds. As Brazilians, we have always had the custom of cheering for our national team in large popular festivals all over the country, therefore I’m sure that this will be the best FIFA Fan Fest of all time.”

The FIFA Fan Fest symbolises the most exciting part of football and the FIFA World Cup: thousands of fans gathered to watch a match together and celebrate.

Ronaldo

Thierry Weil, FIFA’s Marketing Director, echoed Ronaldo’s words, saying “The FIFA Fan Fest provides FIFA and the LOC with a platform to strengthen the fan experience of the FIFA World Cup, taking the event to millions of fans outside of the stadiums. We’re delighted by the enthusiasm shown by the Host Cities so far and look forward to implementing this spectacular event together in 2014.”

The FIFA Fan Fest first became part of the official programme for the FIFA World Cup™ in Germany in 2006, following the huge success of unofficial public viewing events in Korea Republic during 2002’s edition of football’s flagship event. The huge success of the FIFA Fan Fest programme in Germany led to the concept being developed further for the 2010 FIFA World Cup™, when not only the South African Host Cities but also six international venues hosted an event which welcomed over six million football fans over 31 days.

The locations of the FIFA Fan Fest in the twelve 2014 Host Cities are as follows:

1. Belo Horizonte – Praca da Estacaoo;

2. Brasília – Esplanada dos Ministerios;

3. Cuiaba – Parque de Exposicoes;

4. Curitiba – Parque Barigui;

5. Fortaleza – Praia de Iracema (Aterrao);

6. Manaus – Memorial Encontro das Aguas;

7. Natal – Praia do Forte;

8. Porto Alegre – Praça Glenio Perez;

9. Recife – Marco Zero;

10. Rio de Janeiro – Praia de Copacabana;

11. Salvador – Jardim de Alah;

12. Sao Paulo – Vale do Anhagabau;



