Yesterday, while I talked with a Kenyan family about the World Social Forum in their front room, the news came over the television that the US had spent a trillion dollars on the war in Iraq. Most of Africa's people have to live on less than a dollar a day. A young woman from this family was a refugee worker whose workload had spectacularly increased since the recent invasion of show Somalia by Ethiopian troops acting as the proxy of the US. The long-war is knocking on Kenya's front door.

Nevertheless Nairobi hasn't been gripped by WSF fever. A day before the event opens the local press seems more concerned with the convoluted manoeverings of various political parties in what is an election year for Kenya. Religion is another headline grabber which has pushed the WSF to the back pages. The Daily Nation ran a wonderful story today involving the matrimonial plans of Bishop Margaret Wanjiru of the Jesus is Alive Ministry. The Bishop has instructed her congregation not to bother praying for her up-coming nuptials to the much-younger Samuel Matjeke as their happiness has "already been ordained in Heaven". Kenya's The Standard ran a fairly low-key Reuter's piece on the looming WSF.

On one level this is no bad thing. The European Social Forum (ESF) held in Florence in the autumn of 2002 was subjected to a sustained attack by the Berlosconi government before it assembled. Hordes of barbarians, Florentines were assured, were about to descend on their city and reduce it to rubble. That sort of publicity no one needs. In any case the Florentines didn't buy it. Europes first Social Forum was its most successful. A million marched through the city against the looming war with Iraq and the groundwork for the international anti-war protest on February 15th 2003 was laid there.

And despite the low level of media interest in the WSF it's clear that something is in the air. Locals are aware that there are more armed police on the streets. The hotels are full to overflowing as WSF attendees arrive from across the planet. Registering for the event is problematic as it becomes clear that the organisers have seriously underestimated the amount of people who will be coming. Over 30,000 alone tried to register today and the final number attending may well be over 150,000.

Tomorrow the opening rally of the WSF will be preceded by a demonstration from Nairobi's notorious Kibera slum. Over one million people live there without regular supplies of water or electricity. The slogan for the demonstration is "Another World is Possible - even for slum dwellers". That's why we're here.