Stop Your City — Stop The War George Bush and Tony Blair are determined to attack Iraq. It will not be a war for democracy — it will be a war to control the oil-rich and strategically vital Middle East. It will not be a war to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, because Iraq does not possess such weapons. The majority of people in this country oppose war. Yet their views are being ignored by the government and marginalised by the media. There will be no vote on war in parliament and only public outcry forced Tony Blair to allow even a “consultative” meeting of the House of Commons. George Bush and Tony Blair are determined to attack Iraq, but they have a problem. Us. The anti-war movement is the great democratic movement in this country. It is the only movement in the country that can force the government to stop the carnage and bloodshed that now threatens peace in the Middle East. We now have to move from words to deeds. We have to move from demonstrations to direct action. If the hundreds of thousands of people who demonstrated in London on 28 September go back and organise direct action in their localities we can build a movement the government cannot ignore. We have to make our numbers count. That is why we are backing Tony Benn’s call for civil disobedience. On Thursday 31 October we are calling on everyone who opposes the war to organise: Meetings in or near your workplace with anti-war speakers, perhaps with a local march. College occupations and teach-ins. In the evening join us for a central protest in the town where you live. Bring banners, sit down and block traffic. We need a protest the media and the government cannot ignore.Contact your local trade unions, peace organisations, student unions, campaigns, mosques and churches. Leaflet every meeting, every workplace, college and high street. Get the new leaflet (PDF). If you have problems viewing this leaflet, then download Acrobat Reader from the Adobe web site by clicking on the icon below. Download the petition sheet and take it around everyone you know. Make Thursday 31 October the day we stop your city or town to stop the war.