

Release: Antiwar Movement Launches Campaign to Block President's Request for Additional Funds for Iraq War



NEW YORK -- United for Peace and Justice (UFPJ), the nation's largest grassroots antiwar coalition, today announced plans for a major nationwide effort to pressure Congress to reject President Bush's request for an additional $93 billion for the war in Iraq. In the coming weeks, as Congress discusses and eventually votes on this additional funding for the war, United for Peace and Justice will undertake a national campaign directed at members of Congress. Elements of this campaign will include: - Meetings and protest activities at district offices of members of Congress during the recess they are scheduled to take the week of Feb. 19th. - Organizing town hall meetings, gatherings in religious institutions and community centers, and other sessions where people can learn more about the role of Congress and the power it has to end the war. - An effort to bring our message into local media outlets. - Using appearances of the 2008 presidential hopefuls as opportunities to raise the antiwar voice. Leslie Cagan, National Coordinator of UFPJ, said, "We will not quietly sit by as the President takes steps to further escalate the war in Iraq. We are outraged that in direct contradiction to the will of the people of this country as expressed during the November midterm elections, Bush remains committed to his failed policy in Iraq. The antiwar movement is launching a campaign calling on Congress to stand up to the President. When the President and his allies in the Republican Party can block a non-binding resolution merely expressing opposition to the war's escalation, the time for timidity in Congress is long past. It is time for Congress to use its power and cut the funds for this immoral war." On Jan. 27th hundreds of thousands of people from at least 47 states gathered in Washington, DC, in an antiwar demonstration organized by United for Peace and Justice. On that day, a clear, strong message was sent to Congress: You have the power to end the war and bring the troops home, and we demand that you use it! In an unprecedented event, the march encircled the Capitol building and grounds in their entirety. In addition, antiwar protests were held in some 100 other cities and towns across the nation. And on Monday, Jan. 29th, at least 1,000 people had meetings with over 400 Congressional offices in what was one of the largest lobby days on any issue in recent memory. "The most supportive thing that Congress can do for our troops is end the war in Iraq by using their 'power of the purse' to de-fund it," said Nancy Lessin, co-founder of Military Families Speak Out, which sits on UFPJ's Steering Committee. "Senators and Members of Congress can not simultaneously oppose and fund this war. All those who do vote for funds to continue the war in Iraq need to understand that this war will no longer be George Bush's war, it will be theirs. If they fund it, they own it." For interviews with representatives of United for Peace and Justice on the President's request for additional war funds and antiwar movement plans to oppose that request, contact Sue Udry or Hany Khalil at the numbers above. # # #

With more than 1,400 member groups under its umbrella, United for Peace and Justice (UFPJ) is the nation's largest grassroots peace and justice coalition. Since its founding in October 2002, UFPJ has spurred hundreds of protests and rallies around the country, including the three largest marches against the Iraq war. http://www.unitedforpeace.org