Close to 10,000 people marched through Tokyo to mark the beginning of the day of protest. Huge rallies were held in cities across Europe. Others took place in countries that included Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand.



Turkish soldiers stand guard behind a peace flag at the entrance of Sabiha Gokcen airport during an antiwar rally in Istanbul Saturday. (AP PHOTO)

Rallies were also held in cities and towns across the United States, including Washington.

Tony Murphy, Washington's march organizer, said he believes the Bush administration is poised to give the order to attack.

"For there to be another massive show of opposition to war in the United States, that's very important. The timing is very important," said Murphy.



Protesters march in Montreal

Dozens of former congressional leaders also believe war is imminent. A group of 70, mostly Democrats, sent a letter to the president on Friday.

Tom Andrews, a former congressman from Maine, said they have a simple message: Disarm Saddam without invading and occupying Iraq.

"We can achieve our objectives and no one has to die," Andrews said.

Organizers called Washington's antiwar march "The Emergency Convergence on the White House.'' Many said this was likely their last chance to voice opposition to rumblings of war in Iraq.

Police escorted marchers as they set out. When they reached Pennsylvania Avenue, a block from the White House, the marchers stopped, the sound of their chants echoing up and down deserted side streets.



Ethan Weed, 13, of Haydenville, Mass., holds his peace flag aloft on the Washington Monument grounds. (AP PHOTO)

For all the noise, President George Bush wasn't there to hear it. He spent Saturday at the Camp David presidential retreat in Maryland, preparing for Sunday's emergency summit with his British and Spanish allies.

At least 45 Canadian communities from Vancouver to Halifax also held antiwar rallies.

About 400 people gathered in Halifax in front of an office tower where the U.S. consular office is located.

By far the largest event was held in Montreal where an estimated 200,000 people marched through the downtown streets.

Organizers said the success of previous demonstrations has fuelled a greater desire for peace. A 24-hour hour silent vigil began Friday at the U.S. consulate in Vancouver.

Most of the protesters joined a larger demonstration Saturday afternoon at the Vancouver Art Gallery.