Organisers of the biggest public demonstration in British history yesterday criticised the Government's response to the protests across the world against war in Iraq.

As between a quarter and half a million people demonstrated in Sydney, bringing to an end 48-hours of global anti-war protests on a scale not seen since the Vietnam War, a senior Government figure reacted uncompromisingly.

Two days after Tony Blair warned the marchers of "consequences paid in blood" if nothing was done, John Reid, the Labour Party chairman, claimed the demonstrators bore some moral responsibility for the murder and torture of the Iraqi people by Saddam Hussein.

"It is not a choice between peace and war. It is a choice between doing something and not doing anything," he said.

"If you take the view that we should not do anything, you too have a moral responsibility, because by doing that you are sustaining the status quo under which there are people being murdered, tortured and dying and starving."

In Washington, Condoleezza Rice, the White House's national security adviser, said the weekend's massive protests against military action in Iraq did not lessen American resolve to overthrow Saddam Hussein.

She said those who took part had "the right to protest," but added; "they do not have that freedom in Baghdad, we should not lose sight of who is in power in Baghdad".

Lindsey German, of the Stop the War Coalition in Britain, said the Government's response showed it was clearly rattled by the scale of the protests in London and around the world. She added: "The reaction of Dr Reid and others is disgraceful. These are people who in the past have armed Saddam Hussein.

"When they talk about him being responsible for killing one million people, they conveniently forget that during the Iran/Iraq war, when the majority of these people were killed, they were the people who supported him. So it is a bit rich to turn around and blame us now."

The numbers in London exceeded all the expectations of the organisers. Until Saturday's demonstration last September's Liberty and Livelihood march, which attracted more than 400,000, was officially the biggest protest staged in Britain.

The organisers of the Stop the War march estimated up to two million had gathered in London, while Scotland Yard said there were well in excess of 750,000 in and around the Hyde Park area at 5pm on Saturday.

But the police accepted that substantial numbers of marchers were still making their way up Piccadilly at that time and did not dispute that around one million people were demonstrating.

"It is not an exact science," said a spokesman for Scotland Yard. "We use officers experienced in crowd control to estimate the size of the crowd." Seven people were arrested for drunkeness or public order offences.

Buoyed by the success of the protest, the Stop the War Coalition said it was planning a countrywide movement of direct action and civil disobedience on the day any bombing of Iraq begins.

A series of demonstrations will be called within hours of the first bombs falling on Iraq; children will be asked to walk out of classes, employees to go on strike and people to mass at village, town and city centres to demonstrate.

In London the group is calling for a mass protest in Westminster and Whitehall which it hopes will amount to "an occupation".

"There is no forum for debate, there's nowhere we can vote on this, even MPs won't be voting on it," said Miss German. "Therefore, people feel it's quite legitimate to use other forms of protest."

In Hyde Park, the scale of the demonstration had taken its toll on the grass - something Tessa Jowell, culture secretary, had raised as a reason to ban the rally in the park.

But Theo Moore, of the Royal Parks Agency, said: "We have coped. We've taken a battering but we'll be back. With that many people, where else would you have put it in London?"

Oliver Letwin, the shadow home secretary, said the march demonstrated the Government's failure to make the case for war against Iraq in a convincing way.

"The problem the Prime Minister faces is that even when he tries to put the case across he does not seem to have the support of his Cabinet," he said. "The time is now very short to persuade the British people and it is very important we should do so if we are going to go to war."

The size of the London demonstration was reflected at rallies elsewhere. In Rome around an estimated three million people marched, 60,000 took to the streets in Oslo, hundreds of thousands in Paris, 75,000 in Sweden, up to half a million in Berlin, and around one million in Barcelona.

As the Sydney demonstration drew to a close yesterday, it was declared the biggest in Australian history. The protest, the biggest of several staged across Australia over the weekend, delivered a powerful message to John Howard, the prime minister, who has supported President George W Bush's tough line on Iraq.

Organisers estimated a turnout of 500,000. Police said at least 200,000 took part. "Whatever [the number] it's the biggest rally in Australian history," said Senator Bob Brown, leader of the Greens. "People here are expressing the spirit of this country on this issue, and the prime minister had better listen."