THREATS AND RESPONSES: PROTESTS; Global Rallies Against War, and Some for Hussein

While the Spanish demonstrations drew large crowds, some others were more sparsely attended. In Seoul, South Korea, 3,000 protesters held towering candles as they paraded through the capital. About 15,000 rallied in Athens, accompanied by a giant reproduction of ''Guérnica,'' Picasso's antiwar painting. And in Moscow, 1,000 people demonstrated in front of the American Embassy.

The events were part of a largely coordinated worldwide effort to rally support against the war.

''We are marching against the law of the jungle that the United States and its acolytes old and new want to impose on the world,'' José Saramago, the Portuguese writer and Nobel laureate, told the crowd, estimated by news organizations at about half a million, gathered in Madrid's Puerta del Sol. Another demonstration was held in Barcelona, where the police said 300,000 people demonstrated, some of them forming a three-mile human chain.

For the second time in a month, crowds of demonstrators jammed the center of Madrid, waving antiwar placards and chanting insults against President Bush and one of his strongest allies, Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain.

Angered at their government's unwavering support for United States policy on Iraq, Spaniards took to the streets here today, one of hundreds of antiwar demonstrations around the world.

In London, where an estimated one million people marched against the war in January, there were protests in several residential neighborhoods and a scheduled concert tonight for 2,000 people aimed at raising money for the Stop the War coalition.

Muslims in London organized walk-bys at the embassies of Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Syria, Egypt, Qatar and Pakistan, countries they accuse of collaborating with the United States. ''The governments of the Muslim world have the power to stop this war by disallowing America and its allies from using their land, airspace, waterways and logistics to perpetrate it,'' said one of the organizers, Dr. Imran Waheed.

In Montreal, about 250,000 people marched through the streets shouting antiwar slogans, in the largest of 30 demonstrations in Canada.

About 100,000 people demonstrated in Berlin, according to police estimates, while 50,000 demonstrators gathered in the Place de la Nation in Paris.

More than 5,000 people marched in Marseille, France's second largest city.

In central Tokyo, an estimated 10,000 people filed through downtown streets to applause from passers-by. According to polls, more than 80 percent of the Japanese people oppose an attack on Iraq, but the government has supported the United States demand that Baghdad disarm or face military action.

In Madrid, few demonstrators saw much hope of persuading Mr. Aznar to change course. ''Hope is the last thing to go,'' said Ernesto Cano, a student attending with his parents and family friends. ''If we keep making an effort there is still a possibility to avoid war.''

But Maria Conde, marching with her three labrador dogs, was pessimistic. ''I don't think this will change anything,'' she said.

In the Middle East, some of the demonstrations were in support of Saddam Hussein. In Khan Yunis, in the Gaza Strip, for example, 10 men in black hoods, wearing mock versions of the explosives belts of suicide bombers, led a march in support of the Iraqi leader.

In Cairo, several hundred people, surrounded by 1,500 police officers, protested outside the University of Cairo chanting, ''With our blood, with our soul, we will defend Baghdad.''

In Nicosia, 2,000 people marched on the American Embassy demanding ''no more blood for oil.'' They also condemned the presence on the island of the largest Royal Air Force base outside Britain, at Akiroti, which is scheduled to play a support and logistics role in any attack on Iraq.