Derry Anti War Protestors Occupy Raytheon Plant

derry | anti-war / imperialism | feature Thursday August 10, 2006 13:35 Thursday August 10, 2006 13:35 by By Stander by By Stander

For anybody looking to emulate free Derry, "there's always Shannon to be getting on with."

On Wednesday 9th August Anti War protesters in Derry stormed into the local plant of US missile manufacturer Raytheon. They were protesting against the use of Raytheon technology by the Israelis and used by them in their attacks in Lebanon.



After eight hours in occupation of the plant nine protesters were arrested by the PSNI and were charged with "Unlawful Assembly" and "Aggravated Burglary" when they appeared in court this morning (Thursday Aug 10th).

IMC Blogger: Both the IAWM and AWI issued quick statements of support as part of the ongoing rapprochement that is within the anti war movements on Indy these days. It should be remembered that Derry is the birth place of the black shamrock, whose powerful images owe much to the campaign against Raytheon. If this spreads south, maybe war will be an election issue as PANA say, or maybe the spirit of direct action will move to Shannon, where apparently that type of stuff could have a legal defence. Either way, can the fine media makers of Derry make sure to keep us all informed. Raytheon Coverage on Indy

On Wednesday 9th August Anti War protesters in Derry stormed into the local plant of US missile manufacturer Raytheon. Raytheon are the largest missile manufacturer in the world. Raytheon technology is supplied to the Israeli government. The campaigners were protesting against its use by the Israelis in their destruction and killing in Lebanon.



After eight hours in occupation of the plant nine protesters were arrested by the PSNI and are to be charged with "Unlawful Assembly" and "Aggravated Burglary" when they appear in court on Thursday morning 10th August.



Derry Antiwar Coalition if calling for those who supporters the protesters to make their voices heard out side Derry Court House in Bishop Street from 9:30 am.







Raytheon Technology bringing death and destruction





Veteran Civil Rights campaigner Eamon McCann addressin the protesters and media from the first floor window.





Files and papers were thrown from windows during the protest.





Example document: part of a presentation on CMMI - a US military software development standard.

