6) South and Central Americas

Mexico City, Mexico

Hundreds march in protest against a possible U.S.-led war in Iraq (AP)



Panama City, Panama

About three thousand demonstrators marched for peace and against the possible U.S.- led war on Iraq (Reuters)



Buenos Aires, Argentina

Demonstrators shout in front of the U.S. embassy in Buenos Aires, Argentina, during a protest against a possible U.S.-led war in Iraq (AP)



Sao Paulo, Brazil

Thousands of protesters march through the Paulista Avenue, Sao Paulo, Brazil's main street, Brazilian anti-war protester shouts slogans to protest against the possible U.S.-led war on Iraq (AP).

London, United Kingdom Hundreds of British Muslims marched in London, calling on Islamic countries not to offer bases or logistical support for a war on Iraq. RAF Leuchars Air Base, United Kingdom Peace Activist Disables Military Plane IMC Report Ploughshares activist Ulla Roder entered RAF Leuchars Air Base (UK) early Tuesday morning in north-east Fife and damaged a Tornado plane with a hammer, putting it out of action. The Tornado's at Leuchars are important in the UK's mobilisation for war against Iraq, and the base, whose motto is "Attack and Protect", is believed to have been involved in the bombing of Iraq since 1991. Also on Tuesday 11th, 9 'citizen weapons inspectors' cut through fences at RAF Lakenheath and cycled around the base, some locking on and obstructing the runway for 3 three hours. Paris, France About 50,000 demonstrators gathered in Paris' Place de la Nation under a huge American flag with a Nazi swastika painted over the stars and the words ``killers and criminals'' written over the stripes. There was a heavy Muslim element to the Paris march, with many people holding Palestinian flags and Arabic signs. (AP) Moscow, Russia More then a thousand demonstrators hold red flags at a protest rally outside the U.S. Embassy in Moscow (AP) Sapin-Green Peace Daniel Rizzoti of Argentina, captain of Greepeace's flagship Rainbow Warrier and Carlos Bravo from Spain, a Greenpeace 'No War' campaigner are handcuffed by Spanish police March 15, 2003. Spanish police boarded environmental group Greenpeace's flagship, the Rainbow Warrior, on Friday after the vessel blockaded a naval base in southern Spain preventing a U.S. military supply ship from leaving as they protested against U.S. war plans on Iraq. (Reuters) Granda, Spain Protesters sit down in the street with banners reading 'No to the War' during a protest in Granada, Spain (AP). Madrid, Spain Tens of thousands march around the Cibeles fountain during a demonstration against a possible U.S.-led war in Iraq in central Madrid. (AP) Bilbao, Spain Anti-war protesters march with a banner which reads 'No to a war' during an anti-war demonstration in the Spanish Basque Country city of Bilbao, thousands of protesters gathered to protest against a possible U.S.-led war on Iraq while the Spanish government's support for military action. (Reuters) Malaga, Spain (Reuters) Frankfurt, Germany Police officers carry away a demonstrator who took part in an sit-in in front of the entrance of the U.S. air base in Frankfurt, central Germany (AP). Berlin, Germany 100,000 Germans form "chain of lights" against war BERLIN, March 15 (Reuters) - More than 100,000 people lit candles and held hands in Berlin on Saturday, forming a "chain of lights" to protest against a war in Iraq. Children, workers, peace activists and elderly people formed a line stretching 35 km (22 miles) across the city, passing the U.S. embassy and the landmark Brandenburg Gate. "The urge for peace and the mobilisation against a war is incredibly great," said organiser Jutta Kausch. "The fact you can get so many people out on the streets on a Saturday night tells you something." Several protesters had drawn the slogan "No War" on to a U.S. flag. Several hundred protesters earlier on Saturday staged a sit-in protest at a U.S. air base near Frankfurt which the United States uses to transport troops and supplies to the Gulf region. Police carried the protesters away. some 10,000 people rallied in the centre of the southwestern city of Karslruhe, and in Nuremberg in the south, 4,000 protesters held each other's hand and formed a "chain for peace" around the town's historic centre. A strong opponent of a war in Iraq, Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder said on Friday Germany, France, Russia, China and the majority of the Security Council still believed Iraq could be disarmed peacefully and weapons inspections should go on. But asked on German n-tv television later on Friday whether he believed a war could be prevented, Schroeder said: "I have doubts whether that can be achieved although I cannot allow myself these doubts." Milan, Italy People dance in downtown Milan, Italy, during a demonstration against a possible U.S. led attack on Iraq. Over 400,000 people, according to police sources, 700,000 according to organizers, marched in Milan to say no to war Saturday. (AP) Bucharest, Romania Hundreds of Romanians march in Bucharest, Romania Saturday, calling for the U.S. troops stationed here to leave and protesting the government's fervently pro-U.S. stance in a possible war on Iraq. Between 3,000 and 4,000 U.S. troops are stationed at an air base in the Black Sea port of Constanta, which is acting as an air bridge for personnel and equipment in the build-up to a possible war against Iraq. The protesters yelled 'Get the troops out of the country' and 'We don't want to be a nation ofslaves' carrying signs with the words 'Stop the disease of the mad cowboy' next to a portrait of U.S. President George W., and 'USA is the shield of Israel'. (AP) Brussels, Belgium About 40,000 demonstrators marched to protest against a possible U.S-led war on Iraq. (AP) Vienna, Austria A couple of hundred demonstrators join a peace march in Vienna, Austria on Saturday, to protest against a possible U.S.-led war against Iraq. (AP) Athens, Greece Demonstrators shout slogans and beat empty oil drums during an anti-war rally outside the Greek Defense Ministry in Athens, Greece Saturday, March 15, 2003. About 300 people protested against a possible US-led attack against Ira. (AP)

8) Asia