contribute an article | administration email this story | download as PDF | print article In D.C., Thousands Protest Bush’s War Plans Against Iraq

by Andrew Kennis 6:04pm Mon Sep 30 '02 (Modified on 6:01pm Fri Oct 4 '02) address: 2412 18th Street NW phone: (202) 986-4222 Andrew@indymedia.org Following a trend of anti-war protests across the globe, between ten and fifthteen thousand protesters showed up yesterday to protest against what is the seemingly imminent war against Iraq. Demonstrators first gathered in Dupont Circle for a rally. Following the speeches and the songs, thousands enthusiastically marched down embassy row and ended up in front of the British embassy and Vice President Dick Cheney’s mansion. [NOTE: All pictures are clickable and enlarge upon access] Thousands Protest Bush’s War Plans Against Iraq Washington, D.C. : Following a trend of anti-war protests across the globe, between ten and fifthteen thousand protesters showed up yesterday to protest against what is the seemingly imminent war against Iraq. Demonstrators first gathered in Dupont Circle during what was a nice Sunday afternoon to hear speakers such as Phyllis Bennis from the Institute for Policy Studies and folk music artists like David Rovics. Following the speeches and the songs, thousands enthusiastically marched down embassy row and ended up in front of the British embassy and Vice President Dick Cheney’s mansion.



The demonstrations, organized by the National Network to End the War Against Iraq amongst other groups, come in light of the Bush administration’s pursuit of a strategy of war with Iraq, ostensibly to secure a “regime change.” Although the mainstream media has all but completely censored as much, the U.S. were closely allied with Iraq during a time where it reached its highest levels of human rights violations.



“The fact of the matter is, during one of Sadaam Hussein’s cruelest chemical attacks on Kurdish civilians, back in March of 1988 in Halapja, the U.S. was completely supportive of the regime,” said Kani Xulam, of the American Kurdish Information Network.



Other protesters echoed similar sentiments, including an African-American veteran of the Vietnam War, who said that Bush is trying to take advantage of an opportunity to divert the attention of Americans from the economy for the upcoming elections. Former Green Party Presidential candidate for the 2000 elections, Ralph Nader, called Bush’s intentions to go to war a “cheap election ploy.”



The Bush administration is trying to also justify the war on the rather flimsy grounds that the Iraqi regime has connections with the Al-Qaeda organization. The allegations, presented without any concrete evidence, harkens back to the time that Tony Blair presented a white paper that argued that Bin-Laden had a direct hand in planning the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon last September (in the international media outside the U.S., the flimsy allegations were not taken very seriously).



The rally and march featured a colorful array of signs, puppets and costumes in the typical creative fashion that protests of the new century have tended towards. The Bread and Puppet theatre from Vermont attended the rally and march, and did a short street theatre skit on stage. A teacher from the Milwaukee area also walked on high stilts while juggling in her Statue of Liberty costume. David Rovics sung political folk songs.



Aside from protesting the war with Iraq, many demonstrators brought signs of solidarity with struggles and movements in Western Asia, most prominently of which was the struggle for self-determination in occupied Palestine . When the march down embassy row passed the Islamic Center, members of the center saluted and supported the marchers.



The march ended up in front of the British embassy and Vice-President Cheney’s mansion. One of the march organizers delivered an official letter to the British embassy, asking Tony Blair’s government to respond to the immense public pressure against the war in England and in the States.



The D.C. protests come in the wake of massive demonstrations in England this past Friday, where 400,000 protesters attended demonstrations organized by the Stop the War Coalition and the Muslim Association of Britain. Over 100,000 in Rome were repoted to have protested the possible strike against Iraq as well.



This trend of protests across the globe conform with the fact that public sentiment is in strong opposition to the war. The UK-IMC reports that “Mainstream media polling has shown an overwhelming majority of the British public opposed to action against Iraq.” In Australia, a reporter from a community radio station puts Australian opposition from polls at well over 70 percent. Even in the United States, where opposition is less present than anywhere else in the globe, the Washington Post reported that more Americans are against the war than in favor of it without ally support (and last Friday, France announced that they would veto any U.N. resolution authorizing force against Iraq).



Such public opposition and lack of support from allies probably explains the growing opposition amongst Capitol Hill representatives from the Democratic party veterans as well, including Senators Edward Kennedy and Robert Byrd and Representative David Bonoir. bari.iww.org/~iww-nyc/CUNY add your own comments media exageration

by stat man 6:06pm Mon Sep 30 '02 more like 900 or so protestors!!!!!! sad truth

by ridwan 10:53pm Mon Sep 30 '02 redline_r@hotmail.com the sad part is that the media (and most of the US) will believe that there were only 900 or so. when there were 400,000 marching in London, we only got news of the 650 that were arrested in our papers; this time, there wasn't even that. unfortunately, the mainstream (rightwing!) media is determined to depict us as the outcasts, rather than simply the outspoken.

--peace. and hope-- On initial crowd estimate . . .

by Andrew Kennis 6:00am Fri Oct 4 '02 Andrew@indymedia.org The person who made the first comment on this piece was probably right at least in one sense, the initial estimate given in my piece is probably off. However, apparently the commentator did not make it to the rally either though, because it was quite obvious that there were many more than merely 900 people at the march.



Save for some corporate media hacks, who obviously did not go to the march and only went to the rally, most sources and observers put the estimates around the numbers that the global feature team put out: between 5 and 10 thousand. Perhaps the commentator got the idea from Manny Fernandez, the sometimes decent and more often pretty bad reporter for the Washington Post, who put his estimate at a mere thousand or so. It's pretty obvious to me though, judging by the content of his article, that he probably did not attend the march and only attended the rally, which admittedly had quite a lot less people than the march.



But there's little doubt in anyone's mind that the march garnered at least 5 to 10 thousand people, if not a bit more than that even. And for an anti-war demo in the U.S., that's big numbers, and may even be surpassed by this Sunday's rally at Central Park in New York City this weekend (which will be at East Meadow at 1pm, by the way . . . hope to see you there).



--AK bari.iww.org/~iww-nyc/CUNY NPR' Memory Hole

by Lois Lane 10:13am Fri Oct 4 '02 This moring (Friday, 10/4) NPR's "Morning Edition" had a report on the anti-war effort in which they referred to last Sunday's event as poorly attended, or words to that effect. Worried

by Oyo the Clown 6:01pm Fri Oct 4 '02 I applaud the protesting, but I fear that there's little effect. I confess read the Metro today (well, it's free) and the only article about the war was about a democratic senator inveighing against the war resolution and the resolution to keep discussion (dissent) brief. He was addressing an empty hall.



The language of the article and the tone all indicated that it was only a matter of time, congress expects the resolution to pass by a wide margin, etc. It doesn't matter whether you think of this as spin or not; it's what every joe who like me is too cheap to buy the morning paper reads on the trolley in Boston. It would behoove us for an alternate viewpoint to be represented, for someone better informed than I to send an article to the Metro. They supposedly print letters-to-the-editor and columns by diverse voices. They may just refrain from printing any radically incisive letters they receive, but if they receive a deluge of them then they may print them. At the very least, call NPR, talk on The Connection. Indymedia needs to have a presence there. All I ever hear is the ill-informed right-winger whining about how big bad Saddam is tricking the poor old USA. Then when someone does get on to say "This is about oil," he/she gets tongue-tied and spouts slogans. We have to do better than the ill-informed right-wingers out there, and we have to speak as frequently and in as many places--not just on indymedia. Being the media works better when a lot of people are listening. The communication break is not serving us. NPR is not the thought-police, you _can_ make yourself heard on there.