One of the prominent female deputies of the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), Meral Akşener, has announced that her defense lawyer has initiated legal proceedings against journalists Cemil Barlas and Latif Erdoğan, who have claimed that "she was recorded in a video with private content."

Speaking to the Rotahaber news portal on Monday, Akşener lashed out at the two journalists, who engaged in a defamation campaign against her when they appeared as guests on the pro-government A Haber channel and implied that she is in a video with "inappropriate content" saying, "They are people who pretend as if they are Muslim but are in essence not.”

Akşener stressed that these claims aim to defame the MHP by targeting her and added: "I have just learned about this ugly campaign. I am very angry and upset in the face of the slander against me. I have never faced such dirty slander though I had terrible times in the past. My defense lawyer has launched legal action against those who raised such shameful allegations."

During the A Haber program, Erdoğan claimed that the Gülen movement, inspired by Turkish Islamic scholar Fethullah Gülen, obtained the alleged inappropriate video to blackmail the politician.

Speaking during live interview aired on Bugün TV on Monday night, Akşener said the campaign aims to silence her, saying she regards Recep Tayyip Erdoğan as her interlocutor since the channel is close to him and the government. “I really wonder what three women think about this [slander campaign]. [Erdoğan’s spouse] Emine Erdoğan, [Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu’s spouse] and the daughter of that channel’s owner [Ahmet Çalık], Songül [Çalık],” she said.

Gülen’s lawyer Nurullah Albayrak also strongly denied the “baseless” allegations on Twitter on Monday night.

The lawyer said Akşener is facing with slanders and threats just because she is a political rival, adding that such claims would never damage Akşener’s prestige. “Nobody other than mankurts who fell into the pool of hate of the pool media believe these lies,” he said.

“Mankurt" is a term used to describe people turned into slaves through torture and memory loss while the term “pool media” refers to a pool of funds contributed by pro-government businessmen in return for favors in the form of public tenders over five years.