The OSCE assessment of the Turkish elections underscores an organized and willing voter base, adding that Recep Tayyip Erdoğan clearly violated the impartial role of the presidency by going on the campaign trail.

The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe shared its observations on monitoring the June 7 Turkish general elections in a press conference in Ankara on Monday ahead of the final report to be completed in two months.



OSCE Special Coordinator Vilija Aleknaite Abramikiene said she was impressed to see people actively going the polls in spite of the numerous tragedies, including the bomb explosion in Diyarbakır province during a rally for the Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP) which killed three and injured hundreds on June 5. "Their continued engagement demonstrates commitment to democratic elections." Abramikiene mentioned the picture of a severely wounded and bandaged citizen casting his ballot as one of the most touching moments.



The observers criticized President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan for violating the impartiality of the presidency along with restrictions on the press. "Even though the constitution obliges him to be non-partisan, he attended an extraordinary number of public events, which were used as opportunities to campaign in favor of the ruling party and to criticize opposition figures," the report underlined.



“While Turkey has a history of a generally functioning, pluralistic system, challenges related to the freedom of expression and the dominant role played by the president in the campaign partially undermined fairness in this election," said OSCE Parliamentary Assembly head Ignacio Sanchez Amor.



The observers also called for the 10 percent threshold to enter the Turkish parliament to be revised. "The 10 percent threshold limits political pluralism, and we continue to urge that it would be lowered substantially," Head of Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe Tiny Kox said.



June 8, 2015 | BGNNews.com with AA | Istanbul