During the meeting of the Council of chairpersons of the EL in Madrid, the chairpersons discussed the preparation of the European elections in May 2014. These elections will be decisive to give the floor to the peoples struggling against austerity.

Democracy is violated in Europe. Only the financial markets make the law. Citizens, peoples, must recover the power to decide the future of Europe. Popular sovereignty, daily attacked, must be respected.

The Council of chairpersons discussed the possibility of presenting a common candidacy for the presidency of the European Commission.

The EL does not believe this new measure is likely to democratize the EU. It will not hide, as European leaders and the troika hope, their authoritarianism.

Having this in mind, the Council of chairpersons believes that there is no reason, during the electoral campaign, to leave the monopoly of speaking to forces responsible for the crisis. Peoples, workers, all those who struggle against austerity and for an refoundation of Europe must have a megaphone.

The Council of chairpersons decided to submit to the decision of the next Congress, December 13-14-15 in Madrid, the candidacy of Alexis Tsipras.

For the EL this application would be a strong symbol of hope for Europe. Greece has been a guinea pig for austerity policies. But Greece resisted and still resists. SYRIZA, the party who’s Alexis Tsipras is president, has brought together the Greek people against the barbarians memoranda and authoritarianism, and for a disaster recovery in Greece, in a united Europe. Alexis Tsipras' voice would be the voice of resistance and hope against the ultra-liberal policies and facing the threat of the extreme right.

This application could bring together many people and many political forces. Until the congress, the Presidency of the EL is mandated by the Council of chairpersons to consult all members and observers parties of the EL, the forces that make up the GUE/​​NGL group in the European parliament, and all those who reject austerity, want a progressive solution to the crisis and another project for Europe.

Council of chairpersons of the Party of the European Left

Madrid, October 18, 2013