Irish MEP leaves ALDE for ECR group Move puts ECR further ahead of ALDE in contest to become the third biggest group in the European Parliament.

Brian Crowley, the only surviving MEP from Fianna Fáil (FF), announced today (23 June) that he is leaving the liberal ALDE group in the European Parliament to join the conservative European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) instead.

The move is a further blow to the ALDE group’s attempts to recruit enough members to become the third-largest group in the Parliament, ahead of the ECR.

Crowley’s announcement comes in defiance of the leadership of Fianna Fáil in Dublin, which had negotiated membership of ALDE in 2009.

The FF MEPs were for a long time in one of the Parliament’s smallest groups, the Union for Europe of Nations (UEN). The party’s leaders, Bertie Ahern, and his successor as prime minister, Brian Cowen, wanted to change groups back in 2004. They felt that the party should be in one of the Parliament’s mainstream groups, as befitting a party that has dominated Ireland’s politics since 1945.

By contrast, Fine Gael, even though back in Ireland has languished in opposition for much of the 1990s and the first decade of this century, has had more leverage in Europe, because it belongs to the centre-right European People’s Party, the biggest of the Parliament’s political families.

Although FF’s politics are largely centrist, the presence of Fine Gael made joining the EPP impossible. Instead the FF leaders sought to sign up to what was then called the European Liberal Democrats and Reformists. Crowley, who was a co-leader of the UEN group, resisted the move, and it was not until 2009 that Cowen’s desire prevailed.

But Crowley was never in favour of the switch. Today he said that switching groups to the ECR would allow him to provide a “better service” for his constituents and “to protect some jobs of Irish staff in Brussels”.

Michaél Martin, leader of the centre-right FF party, who was Europe minister back in 2004, said that he would have wanted Crowley to stay in the ALDE group.

Crowley was one of the co-leaders of the UEN group. But in the wake of 2009’s European Parliament elections, the group fell apart and FF left to join ALDE.

Crowley’s decision will put ECR further ahead of ALDE on numbers of seats. With hours to go before the group formation has be complete, ECR is likely to be the third largest group with 69 MEPs, compared to ALDE with 66 MEPs.

The ECR group will take a formal decision on admitting Crowley at a meeting in Brussels tomorrow (24 June). It will also decide on whether to admit the Flemish party N-VA.