Beppe Grillo, the Italian comedian who is head of Italy's anti-euro Five Star Movement is to team up with Nigel Farage to "bring down Brussels" from within the European Parliament.

Following an online poll on Thursday 78 per cent of Five Star members, or 23,121 people, voted to join Mr Farage's Europe of freedom and democracy group in a personal triumph for the Ukip leader.

"I am extremely pleased with this result," he said.

"I look forward to working with 5 Star Movement very much to provide a genuine voice of opposition in the European Parliament. We will be the people's voice."

Only 10 per cent, or 2,930 voted to join David Cameron's Conservative grouping despite an online video appeal from Sayed Kamall, a Tory MEP, for Mr Grillo's MEPs to join them instead of Ukip.

Mr Grillo met Mr Farage in a Brussels curry restaurant, the Ravenstein Brasserie, two weeks ago to discuss the alliance and told his members that the Ukip leader has "a sense of humour and sense of irony".

The Italian comedian whose party claims to be neither Left nor Right leaning, holds a much stronger position on immigration than many of his MPs and MEPs, who have previously voted against anti-immigrant measures.

A key part of the deal between the two men, who have been nicknamed the "Grillage people" in Brussels, is a promise by Mr Farage that Five Star's 17 MEPs will be free to vote according to their principles.

"We operate as a loose association of people. No one is whipped and told how to vote provided they adhere to the principles of the group," Mr Farage told Five Star members in a video appeal.

"We're an open minded party. The reason we've been taking stick is the same reason youﾒve been taking stick; for taking on the establishment."

Mr Farage successfully warned the Italian Eurosceptics who want a referendum on Italy's euro membership against joining the Conservatives after past comments by George Osborne warning that the loss of national sovereignty is a price that countries must pay for preventing the single currency's collapse.

"Remember the Conservative chancellor says that it is the inexorable logic of the euro that all those countries involved must sign up to a fiscal compact and must begin to build what will be a United States of Europe," said Mr Farage.

Mr Grillo took 21 per cent of the Italian vote, giving him 17 seats in the European parliament and making his Five Star Movement the second biggest party in Italy.

Mr Farage won the British vote to take 24 seats, giving both a powerful base in the EU assembly where Ukip is locked in rivalry with Marine Le Pen's Front National.

His alliance with Mr Farage is will also joined by Czech, Dutch, and Lithuanian MEPs leaving Ukip two countries short to qualify as publicly funded group in the EU parliament.

"This gives a great confidence boost to those other delegation members who are coming to sign up to our common group next week. This feeds into a process of solidifying what should be a big group," said Mr Farage, who is holding talks with MEPs from five countries.