ECR group takes two parties from Farage The ECR group, launched by the British Conservatives and allies in 2009, has snatched the Danish People’s Party and The Finns away from Nigel Farage’s EFD group.

The European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group in the European Parliament voted tonight (4 June) to accept applications from a handful of new parties, including the controversial Danish People’s Party and The Finns, both of which sat in Nigel Farage’s Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD) group in the last term.

There are four Danish People’s Party MEPs and two in the delegation of The Finns. The ECR group also voted tonight to accept applications from one MEP from the German Family Party, two Slovak MEPs from the NOVA and OL’aNO parties, and one Independent Greek. The additions raise the number of ECR MEPs to 55, just four short of the 59 seats currently held by the Liberals (ALDE). The group already has 12 countries represented, comfortably clear of the required threshold of seven to qualify for funding from the Parliament.

The group has also received an application to join from the German Eurosceptic party Alternative für Deutschland, but did not consider that application today.

The Danish People’s Party is generally described in Denmark as being ‘right-wing populist’. The Finns, formerly called the ‘True Finns’, are described as a ‘populist nationalist’ party. Each of the parties comes with one MEP with past criminal convictions for inciting ethnic tension because of anti-immigrant writings – Morten Messerschmidt from the DPP and Jussi Halla-aho from The Finns.

The ECR was formed in 2009 at the start of the last Parliament. It followed the earlier decision by British Prime Minister David Cameron to take his MEPs out of their alliance with the main centre-right EPP group, believing it was too federalist. The Conservatives were the biggest delegation in the group in the last term, but after the elections are about even with their partner Law and Justice from Poland.

Syed Kamall, the Conservative leader in the European Parliament, insisted tonight that the Danish People’s Party is not a far-right party. “The Danish People’s Party is on a political journey,” he said. “It now has a policy of controlled immigration and disagrees with those on the Left who would allow uncontrolled immigration and benefit tourism. There is a clear distinction that the left-wing media often fails to make between a party that wants to control immigration and one that seeks to demonise immigrants. The Danish People’s Party is the former.

The Danish People’s Party came in first place in Denmark’s elections to the European Parliament on 25 May. “As it moves towards becoming a major party of government in Denmark, we are pleased to see that, like so many other parties in other European countries, it is attracted to the Conservative agenda of reform,” said Kamall.

The admission of The Finns still has to overcome a minor technical obstacle, but both the ECR and The Finns said they consider the deal done.

“Our choice allows for a strong participation in the EU’s reform effort, which aims at reducing the EU’s regulatory power,” said Finns MEP Sampo Terho. “I am pleased that at the same time, by being part of the ECR group, we will be associated with our long-term partner, the Danish People’s Party,” added Finns chairman Timo Soini (pictured).

The development is bad news for Nigel Farage, who is trying to keep his Europe of Freedom and Democracy group together as its member parties are lured away by the ECR and the new ‘European Alliance for Freedom’ being formed by Marine Le Pen. Le Pen has already convinced the Italian Northern League to leave Farage’s group and join hers.

A group needs a minimum of 25 MEPs from at least seven different member states to be recognised by the Parliament. Le Pen now has 38 MEPs from five countries. The only group that has committed itself to being in the EFD in the next term is Farage’s own UKIP, with 24 MEPs.