Report about error Selected text Your comment

Please highlight any error in the text

and then click on it with your left mouse button [to leave a suggestion]

BNS

Lithuania’s opposition Homeland Union-Lithuanian Christian Democrats (HU-LCD) on Thursday expressed its support to the ex-Latvian Prime Minister Valdis Dombrovskis as a candidate for the post of the President of the European Commission.

Uniting centre-right politicians, the European People’s Party will choose its candidate to lead the European Union’s executive institution at a congress in Dublin in March.

The Presidium of the HU-LCD decided to support Dombrovskis after evaluating his contribution to bringing the economic crisis under control, the HU-LCD said in a statement.

HU-LCD leader, ex-Prime Minister Andrius Kubilius said the election of Dombrovskis as President of the European Commission would be seen as the appreciation and recognition of the whole three Baltic States’ contribution to the resolution of the economic crisis as well as the adoption of firm decisions at the time.

“Together with our Estonian colleagues, we have expressed support for Dombrovskis as we know him very well and appreciate his considerable contribution to bringing the economic situation during the recession in Latvia under control,” Kubilius was quoted as saying in the statement.

Dombrovskis resigned as Latvia’s Prime Minister in late 2013 following a tragic incident in a suburb of Riga when the roof of a Maxima supermarket collapsed, leading to the death of dozens of people.

After the European Parliament was given a more important role in the appointment of heads of EU institutions under the Lisbon Treaty, European political parties decided to nominate their own candidates to replace Portuguese Jose Manuel Barroso who has been serving as president of the European Commission for the last ten years.

Other candidates include ex-Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean Claude Juncker, French European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services Michel Barnier, Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk, Irish Prime Minister Enda Kenny and Finnish Prime Minister Jyrki Katainen.

According to Brussels media reports, Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaitė is also mentioned as one of possible candidates, but her chances are hampered by the upcoming presidential elections coinciding with negotiations on Europe’s top positions.

Uniting Europe’s leftists, including the Social Democratic Party of Lithuania, the Party of European Socialists has already nominated European Parliament President Martin Schulz. Meanwhile, European liberals want to see ex-Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt as the next EC president.

The parties’ decisions to nominate candidate will not be decisive because in the summer, after elections to the European Parliament and the presidential elections in Lithuania, member states will hold final negotiations on many positions, including on heads of the European Commission, European Council, European Parliament, EU foreign policy chief and NATO secretary general.