By Dave Keating - 20.02.2014 / 17:30 CET

Centre-right group of British Conservatives and allies will not put forward a candidate for European Commission president.

The group of European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR), the bloc of anti-federalist centre-right members of the European Parliament created by the British Conservatives and ally parties in 2009, announced today (20 February) that it will not put forward a candidate for president of the European Commission.



The other political groups in the Parliament have decided to put forward headline candidates for the presidency of the European Union's executive branch ahead of May's European elections.



The idea is that giving voters the chance to select a candidate for the most powerful position in the EU institutions will drive up voter turnout and increase the EU's democratic legitimacy.



Speaking at a press conference announcing the decision, the group's secretary-general, Dan Hannan, said that participating in the process would be to legitimise a federalist vision of a European super-state. “There is no evidence of popular demand for having more pan-European elected positions,” he said.



To defend its decision, ECR released an opinion poll conducted by ComRes which found that 65% of Europeans surveyed in the six largest EU countries have never heard of Martin Schulz, the Party of European Socialists candidate for Commission president and current president of the European Parliament. The poll found that 84% have never heard of Guy Verhofstadt, the candidate for the ALDE group of Liberals, and 66% have never heard of Jean-Claude Juncker, the former Eurogroup chairman who is tipped to become the centre-right EPP group's candidate.



José Manuel Barroso, the current president of the European Commission, was unknown to 26% of those surveyed. The survey was conducted in Poland, Spain, Italy, Germany, France and the UK.



Martin Callanan (pictured), the ECR group's president, said that this lack of a European demos means that any process of directly electing a European Commission president would be illegitimate.



“Do you really think that a Danish person going out there to vote is thinking to themselves, ‘would I prefer Jean-Claude Juncker to be president of the European Commission or Martin Schulz?” Callanan asked.



“We're living in a Brussels bubble here,” he added. “We're interested in this subject, we know about it. But really, in the world out there I find it hard to believe that more than a micro percentage of the population in any country are actually going to be basing their vote in the elections on any serious consideration of who the trans-European candidates might be.”



For this reason, he said, the ECR group will not be issuing a pan-European manifesto. Because they are an “alliance of parties” rather than a united front, each party will come out with different election manifestos.

However the ComRes survey also showed that 39% of respondents to the ComRes survey said they are "happy that members of the European Parliament are choosing the next President of the European Commission, as this will make the winning candidate more legitimate." 27% disagreed with this statement, while 34% said they had no opinion.

Steven Peer, a professor at the University of Essex and expert in EU law, said the group was choosing to ignore inconvenient findings of the survey they commissioned. “Since 61% of those [with an opinion] support basing the selection of the next Commission president on the results of the vote for the European Parliament, this contradicts what Dan Hannan said about there being no evidence of any public support for this,” he said.

The British Conservatives make up about half of the ECR group. They are joined by hard-right MEPs from the Law and Justice (Pis) party from Poland and the Civic Democrats (ODS) from the Czech Republic, plus one MEP each from eight other member states.



Although the group will not field a candidate, its leaders said they will insist they be allowed to take part in the presidential debates, including a televised debate staged by the European Broadcasting Union. The ECR will select the MEPs to participate in these debates at a later date.



The only other group that is not putting forward a candidate for Commission president is the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group (EFD), led by UK Independence Party (UKIP) head Nigel Farage. The EFD has not yet decided whether it will take part in the debates.



The far-left GUE/NGL group is the only one to nominate a candidate who is not an MEP – Alex Tsipras, the leader of the Syriza party in Greece. The Greens have nominated two MEPs – French MEP José Bové and German MEP Ska Keller.



The 2008 Lisbon Treaty stipulates that the EU's national leaders will select the Commission president “taking into account the elections to the European Parliament”. Their selection must then be approved by a majority of the Parliament.



The group leaders say this means the Council should appoint the nominee of the political group which secures the most votes in the elections. But national leaders including German chancellor Angela Merkel have poured cold water on this idea, saying the Council will not be bound by the election outcome.



According to an election result forecast by PollWatch2014 released yesterday, the ECR would lose more seats than any other group in the next parliamentary term – losing more than a quarter of their current 57 seats. Asked whether the group may not have enough MEPs to continue to exist in the next term, Hannan said he is positive that the ECR will actually have more MEPs in the next term than it has currently.



Callanan acknowledged that the ECR is in talks with other political parties about joining ECR, but would not say which ones. He said the party will not unite with any far-right or nationalist parties.