Fire officials were expecting the Fort McMurray blaze to hit 2,000 square kilometres Sunday, bigger than both Calgary and Edmonton.

“In no way is this fire under control,” Alberta Premier Rachel Notley told a briefing Saturday.

But the fire was burning away from the city of Fort McMurray, with fire crews facing west winds Sunday, expected to gust up to 60 kilometres per hour. Environment Canada was forecasting a 70 per cent chance of showers Sunday evening. Provincial wildfire officials are expected to give a new update around mid-day Sunday.

Fort McKay was put under a voluntary evacuation Saturday and by late Saturday evening 200 people had been flown out, mainly seniors and those with respiratory problems. Mandatory evacuations orders remain for Fort McMurray, Anzac, Gregoire Lake Estates and Fort McMurray First Nation, although provincial officials are making preliminary re-entry plans to ensure a safe return.

At an update Saturday, officials said they held the line, protecting critical infrastructure for a second day and the blaze was headed northwest into the boreal forest, toward the Saskatchewan border.

Environment Canada 7-day forecast for Fort McMurray showing 40 per cent chance of showers Monday. #ymmfire pic.twitter.com/AbDigSnkN4 — Elise Stolte (@estolte) May 8, 2016

More than 2,400 vehicles were escorted south through Fort McMurray Sunday and RCMP began escorting convoys of 30 trucks north through the city to support critical infrastructure in the oilsands region.

Alberta issued an update at 8 p.m. Saturday with a long list of resources for Fort McMurray evacuees. Emergency financial assistance on pre-loaded debt cards will be provided with more details on when and how coming May 11. The province will provide $1,250 per adult and $500 per dependant but are asking evacuees who have the resources to manage on their own to avoid claiming these right away so those who need it most have access.

Fire conditions remain extreme across the province and 12 new fires started Saturday. A total 43 wildfires are burning with seven out of control. More than 1,400 fire fighters, 133 helicopters, 200 pieces of heavy equipment and 27 air tankers are involved in the effort province-wide.

In no way is this fire under control.

Premier Rachel Notley said the gas supply has been turned off in the city and the power grid has been damaged.

Water in the city isn’t drinkable and hazardous material will have to be cleaned up before residents can return, although the government has begun preliminary planning for people to return.

Syncrude oil facilities in northern Alberta were evacuated Saturday as the company decided to move its employees as a precaution.

Scott Long of the Alberta Emergency Management Agency says a Suncor facility was also evacuated on Friday.

No new figures were released Saturday on the number of structures that have been damaged in Fort McMurray. Earlier this week the government said 1,600 buildings were destroyed.

Chad Morrison with Alberta Wildfires said damage to buildings in the community of Anzac was not as great as first feared. Twelve structures were damaged, said Morrison, six fewer than originally reported.

“The good news is, it continues to move away from the community and oilsands facilities,” he said.

The weather could also improve in the coming days with cooler temperatures and a chance of showers, he added.

Federal Public Safety Minister Ralph Goodale said the fire situation in the area area remained “unpredictable and dangerous.”

Firefighters from other provinces were being brought in to spell off those who have been battling what he calls “this beast of a fire” for a week, he told a news conference in Regina.

Goodale said plans are in place to spell off firefighters who have been battling the blaze this week.

Eighty firefighters from Ontario have already arrived. Goodale said another 44 are on their way from Quebec and 22 from New Brunswick. Equipment, such as pumps, hoses and tankers, are also coming from other provinces.

“What we’re trying to do, with the co-operation of other provinces and territories, is bring in rotations of other firefighters that can give them a break.”

Goodale also said the convoy moving people who have been taking shelter at oilsands work camps north of Fort McMurray continued and about 7,500 people were moved through the city to the south on Friday.

Officials have stressed the wildfire that forced 80,000 people from their homes remained out of control and was likely to burn for weeks.