Monday's firefighting operations stopped at 10 a.m. Crews will return to the west fire at 9 a.m.

The majority of the fire near TaigaNova has been extinguished. Crews will return at 8 a.m. to look for hot spots

Construction of a fire break near the west fire will continue throughout the night.

The mandatory evacuation order has been lifted for Prairie Creek. Like parts of Gregoire, the area is now facing a voluntary shelter-in-place notice.

A voluntary shelter-in-place notice still applies for the area east of Gregoire Drive/Mackenzie Boulevard and north of Mackay Crescent/Maclean Road.

Centennial Park is still under a mandatory evacuation order.

The municipality and Fort McMurray Fire Department are asking people not to fly their drones near the fires and to stay off nearby trails.

Mayor Melissa Blake is asking people not to light backyard fires or fireworks, keep off-road vehicles off nearby trails.

The next media update is scheduled for 11 a.m. at the Jubilee Centre.

The wildfire threatening the southwest edge of Fort McMurray has moved further away, and crews are continuing to fight to keep it that way, municipal and provincial officials said in a press briefing Monday afternoon.

The fire, which Regional Emergency Services is referring to as the “west fire,” has grown to about 1,250 hectares. It is now 1.5 kilometres from the nearest residence.

In a Monday morning press briefing, the fire’s estimated size and disposition was 500 to 750 hectares, but smoke made it difficult for pilots to accurately assess its size. It was burning 1.2 kilometres from city limits.

"It's been a great day for us," said Fort McMurray Fire Chief Darby Allen, referring to the efforts of fire crews and emergency personnel. "We're certainly very happy that no one's had their properties damaged, no one's been hurt, and we hope that continues.”

There is no sign it is burning towards the city and by Monday afternoon, had started moving away from neighbourhoods. As a result, Mayor Melissa Blake has announced the mandatory evacuation order for Prairie Creek is lifted. A voluntary shelter-in-place order is now covering the area.

"You should have your bags and be ready to go," she said.

A mandatory evacuation order is still in place for Centennial Park, and Gregoire is also facing a voluntary shelter-in-place notice.

In the meantime, Allen is warning hikers and anyone on off-road vehicles to stay away from the fires and off the trails near the affected area. Earlier on Monday, the pilot of a tanker was forced to turn his aircraft around because someone had parked a jeep on the trail system to watch the fire.

"Which, by the way, is completely crazy," he said. "We can't carry on dumping water while we know there are people down there."

Blake stressed personal responsibility, asking people not to light backyard or camp fires for the remainder of the week, and not to throw cigarette butts on the ground.

"Use some common sense here," said Allen.

Hot, dry Tuesday will bring challenging conditions: Schmitte

An estimated 500 to 700 people could go home tonight, said Bernie Schmitte, wildfire manager with Alberta Agriculture and Forestry.

Throughout the day, seven helicopters dumped water on the area as tanker planes dumped fire retardant. Schmitte said after the press briefing more personnel are trickling into the area.

Approximately 36 firefighters were on the ground as of Monday afternoon, an increase from the morning’s 28. Allen says the fire’s location makes it difficult to send larger groups, but as it shrinks in size, more firefighters can be deployed.

But at least 128 firefighters on the ground are on standby. Two bulldozer crews will try to work throughout the night building fire breaks between the fire and Highway 63.

As of Monday evening, Environment Canada's Fort McMurray forecast for Tuesday is a high of 30 C with low humidity, heightening the fire risk. The wind is expected to blow from the southeast in the morning, than the southwest in the afternoon.

But Schmitte and Allen are confident in their personnel and action plan. The priority in the morning will be keeping the fire's northern flank in check.

"We're blessed we didn't get 35 kilometre winds in the wrong direction," said Allen.

The causes of each of these fires is still being investigated, but Blake and Allen urged residents to be cautious during the upcoming dry season.

“For me, this is a very significant first"

On Sunday night, approximately hundreds of residents were forced to leave their homes in the Prairie Creek and Centennial Trailer Park area. The municipality estimated at least 500 people had left the area last night.

An evacuation centre at MacDonald Island Park opened. The municipality says 110 registered to stay at the recreation centre, while 41 stayed in group lodgings. By the morning, that number had shrunk to 28.

For most of Sunday evening and Monday’s early morning hours, there was “a real possibility” the west fire would enter the city limits. As night fell, aircraft were grounded and firefighting crews left the area, as it was too dangerous to work in the dark.

But during the night, the wind died and humidity increased, halting any growth.

“I’m more encouraged today that maybe it won’t hit town,” said Allen. “Yesterday we were pretty confident it was coming and that’s why we evacuated those people.”

Blake said she felt relieved after hearing Allen’s briefing, but commented she had never seen a fire of this size so close to a residential area.

“For me, this is a very significant first,” she said.

A second fire near Parsons Creek is also being battled, but Allen says he expects this fire to die soon. There were 25 firefighters and forestry workers at the scene on Monday morning. While there were some flare-ups throughout the night, he says it has been "on hold" since 4 p.m. Sunday. Since Friday, there have been four forest fires within and straddling the city limits.

“We’ve had four significant fires in the last five days or so. That’s pretty intense,” said Allen. “Hopefully, nature’s done its thing and it’ll leave us alone for a little bit, but we’ll have to see.”

Both Blake and Allen praised volunteers who offered their time at MacDonald Island Park, and good samaritans who opened their homes for those facing evacuation orders. Allen says he has had to turn down residents offering financial donations, saying the department has enough financial resources.

"In terms of the folks who have anted up and given support [...] I can't be more appreciative than what I am," said Blake.

"We have been getting a lot of wonderful calls" from people looking to volunteer, Allen said. All volunteer roles are currently filled but those looking to volunteer their services can call 780-762-3681.

Wildfire continues to threaten Fort McMurray neighbourhood

Early Monday, Environment Canada issued a special air quality statement for the following areas:

• Lac La Biche Co. near Crow Lake Prov. Park

• Lac La Biche Co. near Wiau Winefred and Grist Lakes

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Fort MacKay and Wallace Creek

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Fort McMurray and Anzac

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Gipsy Lake and Whitemud Falls

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Grand Rapids Wildland Prov. Park

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Janvier South and Conklin

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Mariana Lake

• R.M. of Wood Buffalo near Stony Mtn Prov. Park and Engstrom Lake

In Gregoire, the area east of Gregoire Drive/Mackenzie Boulevard and north of Mackay Crescent/Maclean Road is facing a voluntary shelter in place notice.

People with breathing difficulties are advised to stay inside and find an indoor place that’s cool and ventilated. Using an air conditioner that cools and filters air may help.

Opening windows may let in more polluted air. For homes without air conditioning, residents should consider going to a public place (library, shopping mall, recreation centre) that is air-conditioned.

-With reporting from Paige Parsons, Olivia Condon and Stephanie Jellett