RCMP and first responders in camps along north of Fort McMurray are on a two-hour evacuation notice, as the fire that scorched the city moves northeast, provincial officials said during a press conference Saturday afternoon.

The out-of-control wildfire could double in size from its current 156,000 hectare footprint, and it is possible it will reach the Saskatchewan border. Firefighting crews are about to face the worst time of day for fire conditions, said Alberta Wildfire spokesperson Chad Morrison.

"We expect extreme fire behaviour throughout the day in the forested areas," Morrison said. The conditions will continue to challenge fire crews working in the forest, but he expects fire crews to battle the blaze "for months to come."

Municipal Affairs Minister Danielle Larivee said the first priority was the safety of the RCMP and first responders in the northern camps. If the fire threatens them they will be airlifted further north or flown south.

Larivee thanked the hamlet of Fort McKay, 60 kilometres north of Fort McMurray, for its "herculean" efforts to assist thousands of Fort McMurray evacuees, but it was now facing a voluntary evacuation notice.

The community has a "robust" emergency fire team and the government has been in continuous contact with First Nations chiefs there, said Executive Director of Emergency Operations Scott Long.

"Many First Nations have opened their communities and homes to evacuees and have made generous donations to the Red Cross," Larivee said. "There are dozens of examples of this kind of generosity in First Nations across Alberta."

Premier Rachel Notley stressed the only people who should be in Fort McMurray are firefighters and first responders. On Thursday, RCMP found an elderly man in one part of the city and a family of five in Dickinsfield. On Friday, they arrested a man accused of looting.

Notley said she understood the urgent desire to return home, but it will not be possible to return to the city in the coming days.

At the afternoon pres conference, Larivee gave a rundown of the services and support offered to evacuees.

Anyone requiring mental health support can contact Alberta Health Services, Larivee said. Evacuees without ID should visit medical personnel in the emergency centres.

Families who want their children studying again can bring them to the schools on Monday to register them for classes, she said.

"As Premier Notley said, we all have your back," Larivee said.

Yesterday the RCMP escorted 7,500 evacuees from northern camps in small vehicle convoys through Fort McMurray heading south on Highway 63. Those convoys are continuing today, and the goal is to finish transporting the evacuees south by the end of the day, Larivee said.

Meanwhile, the Alberta government is discussing long-term transitional housing options, Notley said.

On Friday the government announced all adult evacuees would recieve $1250 in emergency funds, with dependents receiving $500 each. The payments would likely come in the form of pre-loaded debit cards. Financial assistance will likely start Wednesday, and evacuees in need should use the reception centres until that time, Notley said.

"The mechanics of delivering the additional money takes a couple of days, and we don't want to over promise and under deliver," she said.

Despite the fire burning through most of the Waterways and Beacon Hill neighbourhoods, major infrastructure in the downtown area is still intact.

"We are very proud that the firefighters in the Fort McMurray area have held the line," Long said.

The last estimate given for total fire damage to Fort McMurray was 1,600 structures lost.

The Fort McMurray First Nation, and the hamlets of Anzac and Gregoire Lake Estates were evacuated Wednesday night as winds pushed the fire south. The last municipal update said Anzac lost 12 structures to the fire, though there is still fire in the area. Gregoire Lake Estates and the Fort McMurray First Nation sustained minimal to no damage.

"It's a miracle," Coun. Jane Stroud said Friday, referring to the southern hamlets. "It appears from pictures that I saw that both schools and the Anzac Community Centre [are fine], and the Anzac Recreation Centre is still standing."

As of 3 p.m. there were 66 firefighters in Anzac fighting off the fire, and keeping it from reaching Gregoire Lake Estates and the Fort McMurray First Nation, Morrison said.

The fire is expected to push northeast, and touch the Suncor sites there. But Chad Morrison, a spokesperson with Alberta Wildfire, says the sites are "very resilient" to fire because of vegetation clearing and trained fire crews already at the site.

Both Syncrude and Suncor began precautionary evacuations of nearby sites this morning. Suncor's in-situ operations at Firebag and MacKay River have been closed since Friday.

Should the fire approach any of the companies' more northern camps, they will be given advance warning by the province, Morrison said.

Syncrude has left as much food and water as possible for the bison at the company's ranch, said spokesperson Leithan Slade. There are approximately 300 bison at the ranch.

"The good news is, it continues to move away from [Fort McMurray]," Morrison said.

The fire is still out of control, and heavy rain and a change in weather is the only thing that will stop it, Long said.

Morrison said there was cooler weather forecast for tomorrow, which would hopefully cause the fire to hold its position instead of spreading.

"We will be fighting this fire for months to come," Morrison said.

-With additional reporting from Vincent McDermott