Fort McMurray evacuees can expect to receive “welcome packages” when they begin returning home the week of June 1, the province said Thursday.

The packages are anticipated to have information on services available in town and also a set of instructions on what residents need to do when they re-enter their homes.

This could include directions on how to dispose of rotting food and to begin dealing with smoke or water damage.

“Everybody will receive a welcome package and there will be welcoming centres in each neighbourhood,” said Scott Long, executive director of operations for the Alberta Emergency Management Agency.

“I’m sure there will be some of those cautionary lines in the package about what residents should expect and what they should do when they first open their residence.”

He said many homeowners should expect some smoke damage, but officials are looking at providing “specialist cleaning services” to assist.

“As part of the re-entry planning, there are a number of plans — debris management, traffic control, access, welcoming plans,” Long said. “It’s not the normal pristine environment, so there are some challenges and there will be some unexpected things.”

As well, returnees will be told they can request a home visit from ATCO technicians, who will conduct a safety inspection, restart the gas and help re-light each appliance.

Electricity has been restored to 90 per cent of customers in the city. Gas has been restored to 75 per cent of customers; however, ATCO has temporarily shut off gas to all homes and businesses in Fort McMurray as precaution while an investigation continues into a home explosion earlier this week.

Provided conditions are safe, evacuees are expected to start returning home June 1 through a phased re-entry process announced by the government on Wednesday.

Wood Buffalo councillors were informed of the date on a Tuesday night conference call, and later spoke with Premier Rachel Notley hours before the announcement. But on Thursday, some councillors expressed reservations about the timeline.

“I think it is a bit aggressive, but again, it’s contingent on weather and all of those five key parameters being met,” said Coun. Tyran Ault.

Ault was referring to the list of criteria Notley outlined as needing to be fulfilled before people would be able to return to the city.

Ault said he “would be comfortable pushing it back by say 10 days.”

Councillors Julia Cardinal, Claris Voyageur and Phil Meagher also expressed some level of concern.

But all the councillors said they were reassured by the premier that safety was the first priority.

“There are always lively debates on municipal councils, but the government makes decisions based on the best advice from experts and officials, and in the best interest of the people affected,” said premier’s office spokesman Matthew Williamson said.

Municipal Affairs Minister Danielle Larivee said Thursday poor air quality has slowed efforts to get the city ready for residents.

She said some retail business owners have also begun returning to town to check out the condition of their shops.

“This is part of the plan to ensure there are some amenities such as grocery stores and pharmacies up and running when residents return,” Larivee said. “These visits were temporarily halted due to air quality concerns, but we are now planning to ramp them up again on voluntary basis.”

She said a five-unit condo complex in Thickwood that caught fire earlier this week suffered more fire damage late Wednesday. The cause wasn’t known.

As for the wildfire, officials said it had grown to more than 505,000 hectares by Thursday morning and had spread eastward across the Saskatchewan border. No communities were under threat from the blaze, and cooler, wetter conditions were helping firefighters in their work.

Senior wildfire officer Chad Morrison said the size of the blaze has now surpassed the total area burned during the entirety of the 2015 wildfire season.

He said the fire had burned up to the edges of the Suncor and Syncrude oilsands operations north of Fort McMurray, but stalled there due to the work of firefighters and the lack of vegetation on the sites. He said no oilsands sites appeared to be under any imminent threat.

However, air quality continues to be a problem in the region. Larivee noted that levels fluctuate rapidly, from a high of 51 in Fort McMurray on Wednesday morning to 11 by the evening.

The city’s air quality rating hovered around three most of the day Thursday, but was expected to climb to 10 or more by the evening. A rating of 10 is considered extreme.

Cool conditions with some rain is expected over the next few days in the region.

With files from Cullen Bird