Anzac, Gregoire Lake Estates and the Fort McMurray First Nation were the first communities to open their doors to Fort McMurray residents fleeing the inferno that would wipe out much of the city’s southern half.

[np_storybar title=”Follow live updates about the fire” link=”#1″]

[/np_storybar]

But by Wednesday evening, as the flames headed south, it became impossible to distinguish them from the thousands who had spent the last 24 hours hours living at the community’s only recreation centre.

A mandatory evacuation order had been issued for the three southern communities, shortly before 10 p.m. Anzac, a community of 718, absorbed as many as 8,000 people at the peak of the evacuation.

Cheyenne Nouar thought she had seen the worst of the fire when after being evacuated to Anzac from the Timberlea neighbourhood in Fort McMurray on Tuesday. On Wednesday evening, the 25-year-old had to flee the flames again.

She heard rumours and started travelling south before the mandatory evacuation order was issued at about 9:50 p.m. in Anzac.

“It has come through Fort McMurray and it’s coming to where we’re going, it’s almost like it’s following us. It’s definitely a monster,” Nouar said.

Now she and her family have taken refuge in a work camp about 20 minutes south of Anzac and are hoping for the best — at least for one more night.

“I thought it was over, it’s just a nightmare,” she said. “You have to pick up and leave again and start the whole process over.

“Right now, it’s kind of like, I don’t want to go to sleep because we might have to get up and leave again. I’m trying to figure out a game plan.”

Debbie Smith, 59, opened her home in Anzac to evacuees from Fort McMurray, never thinking she would become one of them.

“We never thought we’d be evacuated,” she said at a gas station in Conklin midnight Wednesday. Conklin is about 110 kilometres south of Anzac on Highway 881.

“We left all our stuff there,” she said. As she and her husband left Anzac, they could see a “red glow” in the sky. There was ash falling all afternoon, she said.

“We’ll stay here for a few days and see what happens.”

Smith said she’s most concerned about her three-year-old grandson, who lives with her in Anzac. The boy’s father’s house in Fort McMurray is believed to have been destroyed. “He’s saying, ‘Is our house going to burn down too grandma?’” Smith said. “It really affects the kids.”

Adrienne McKellar, 46, said she was going to wait it out in Conklin too. Her husband is essential staff at a Suncor plant just south of Anzac and can’t leave, she said. Her plan was to wait and sleep in her truck until she knew he was safe.

Before she left Anzac, she looked out her window and could see a “wall of fire” on the other side of Gregoire Lake. “It was a glowing red flame,” she said.

The south-blowing wind also forced the evacuation of the Regional Emergency Operations Centre near the airport, regrouping at the Bold Centre in Lac La Biche. It had been operating as an evacuation centre since Fort McMurray was first evacuated Tuesday evening.

Officials marshalled buses to help with the evacuation at 11 p.m. Mounties went door-to-door to alert people.

Early Thursday morning, authorities said the late night evacuation effort was successful.

The sudden crisis was in keeping with a disaster that Wood Buffalo regional fire Chief Darby Allen described Wednesday as a “nasty, dirty fire.”

“There are certainly areas of the city that have not been burned, but this fire will look for them and it will find them and it will want to take them,” Allen said.

Thursday promises to bring another challenging day.

A lower high temperature of around 20 C is expected in Fort McMurray, which could provide slightly better conditions for firefighters to safely move into critical areas, Morrison said.

Canada Task Force 2, Alberta’s provincial disaster response team, arrived and began offering support in the early hours of Thursday, according to Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo social media.

Alberta declared a provincial state of emergency — a trigger for beefed up federal assistance — on the second day of the mandatory evacuation of 88,000 Fort McMurray residents. An estimated 1,600 destroyed homes and businesses had been destroyed, Premier Rachel Notley said Wednesday morning.

In Fort McMurray, municipal officials estimated 70 per cent of Beacon Hill, a neighbourhood with 600 dwellings, was destroyed. The nearly 200 homes in Waterways, one of the city’s original neighbourhoods tucked along the Clearwater River, were decimated. Half of Abasand’s more than 1,750 dwellings were lost. Other neighbourhoods north and south of the Athabasca River reported isolated damage.

The Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo is reporting on social media that north Abasand is now on fire and the radio-cell tower is under threat from the blaze. The new airport facility has not been damaged, but there has been serious damage to Old Airport Road structures.

Late Wednesday, crews worked to battle a fire near the city’s international airport. The municipality said via social media that the Nova Hotel across the road from the airport was on fire.

Highway 63 was closed near the airport both northbound and southbound, cutting off any evacuation from the camps north of the Athabasca.

Stories from two days of catastrophic fire and high stakes evacuation flowed Wednesday, equal parts madness and miracle.

Police worked their way through the city’s hazy, empty streets with sirens flashing and bull horns out in search of anyone left behind or attempting to tough it out.

Alberta Transportation sent fuel trucks north to deliver gas to stranded motorists.

Wildrose Leader Brian Jean managed to snap a picture of his demolished Waterways home, who also was later forced from Anzac. It is a house filled with memories for Jean, whose 24-year-old son, Michael, died last year.

“I lost my son last year and that was 1,000 times worse. It’s why people need to evacuate, need to get out,” Jean said. “You can replace stuff, things, but you can’t replace a life.”

The magnitude of Tuesday’s mass exodus, the largest wildfire evacuation in Alberta’s history, started to sink in.

“No one is hurt and no one is passed away right now,” Allen said, his voice catching with emotion. “I really hope we get to the end of this and we can still say that. We are here, we are strong and we will keep doing our job.”

Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo Mayor Melissa Blake spoke Wednesday morning during a fire briefing from the Firebag camp north of the Athabasca River where she was evacuated with her family. It was just one example of how the community was split, colleagues and families divided in the name of safety.

Fort McMurray residents are strong, Blake said. “But the reality is settling in, how significant and serious the loss is, and nobody in my community is leaving somebody standing alone.”

Notley went on an aerial tour of the scene and spoke to evacuees at a recovery centre in Anzac on Wednesday evening. “We may have a long road ahead of us, but they can count not only on the government, but the people of Alberta to support them,” she said.

She caught a glimpse of the city from a helicopter, but said she couldn’t make out much through the smoke. She said the biggest victory was getting residents out of danger.

As Fort McMurray emptied out, oilsands companies throughout the region dramatically scaled back or shut down operations.

Investigators pinpointed the site of the fire’s origin, which officials labelled the Horse River Fire, in a heavily forested area just south of the Athabasca River, southwest of the city.

But senior wildfire manager Chad Morrison told a briefing that it will be a couple of days before they have more information about the fire’s cause.

“At this time of year, human causes are generally what we see, but we’ve also had lighting fires early in the season, so at this point we’re working with investigators,” he said.

Fire officials are talking about the battle in terms of days.

“I think we will still be challenged in the next number of days, at least until the weekend,” Morrison said.

He said fire crews are focused on getting through Wednesday night, after which they will have a better idea of where things stand.

Thursday also may bring more information for people evacuated to oilsands facilities north of Fort McMurray.

Scott Long, executive director of the Alberta Emergency Management Agency, said officials would have preferred evacuees all head south, but that wasn’t an option at the time.

“When you have 80,000 people leave in a relatively short period of time, it’s very hard to control,” Long said. “It’s managed chaos.”

As soon as the situation has stabilized, Long said one of the first priorities will be getting people out of the northern camps and moving them south.

For the time being, a military aircraft will deliver food, water and other needed supplies to the camps Wednesday night or Thursday morning.



Reporting by Otiena Ellwand, Janet French, Emma Graney, Keith Gerein, Gordon Kent, Dave Lazzarino, Bill Mah, Vincent McDermott, Paige Parsons, Trevor Robb, Paula Simons and Elise Stolte.