Re-entry should be complete by June 15, to coincide with full restoration of Northern Lights Regional Health Centre.

We will be directing that schools in the area that were closed during the evacuation will not be conducting formal classes until September.

Residents of homes lost to the fire will have the opportunity to inspect their property and collect any surviving items before cleanup begins.

“Many hazards remain in Fort McMurrary. We need to address them before it’s safe for residents to return home. We’ve developed a phased and voluntary re-entry plan with the Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo that begins with the least damaged areas.” Premier Rachel Notley

“I want to thank both the Premier and the Minister for working and consulting with us on a timetable for re-entry. Safety remains paramount before we can return home, but today’s announcement will bring comfort to all evacuees looking to start rebuilding their lives.” Brian Jean, MLA, Fort McMurray-Conklin

Residents can only return when five key conditions are met:

Wildfire is no longer an imminent threat

Critical infrastructure to support essential services is repaired and restored to provide a basic service level.

Essential services are restored to basic level, including: Emergency Services (Fire, EMS, Police, 911) Open, safe transportation to, and within, the community (includes traffic controls) Access to emergency medical care and patient transport Access to potable water, electricity and gas Access to food, pharmaceuticals, banks and other essentials Access to mental health supports

Hazardous areas are secure

Local government is re-established

“Safe re-entry is essential to any timing and will not be compromised," said Mayor Melissa Blake. "It is helpful to have a plan that covers both a high need to respect citizens' wishes to return with only basic services, as well as an extended range that provides a more comfortable re-entry timeline.” Melissa Blake, Mayor, Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo

The re-entry of residents will occur by zone number to allow for efficient and safe traffic flow up Highway 63. Phased re-entry also ensures that limited services will be available to residents. The re-entry schedule and details for residents will be available online. (www.emergency.alberta.ca)

Re-entry Schedule

Zone 1 – Lower Townsite, Anzac

Zone 2 (a) – Parsons Creek, Stone Creek, Timberlea North of Confederation

Zone 2 (b) – Eagle Ridge, Timberlea south of Confederation, Dickensfield

Zone 3 – Thickwood, Wood Buffalo

Zone 4 (a) – Gregoire, Saprae Creek Estates

Zone 4 (b) Waterways, Abasand, Beacon Hill

Before returning to the community, residents are advised to:

Check the status of your property with the Fire Assessment Tool. Updated maps are expected soon.

Call your insurance company about what it requires from you regarding information about your property and any damage it may have sustained

Speak with your mortgage holder/lender about mortgage/payment options

Residents with the following medical conditions or situations should not return to the community until the Northern Lights Regional Health Centre is fully operational:

A chronic or acute medical condition, such as asthma

Anyone requiring regular primary care, specialist care, laboratory or diagnostic services

Anyone requiring counselling or mental-health services

Anyone more than 36 weeks pregnant or with a high-risk pregnancy

Anyone receiving cancer treatment, dialysis or other specialized medical services

Anyone requiring home care, home oxygen or home health supports

Anyone recently discharged from hospital or who has had a transplant

What to expect when you return to the community:

Most critical infrastructure has been restored, but several services will not be fully restored immediately.

A number of fires are still burning in the region. If weather conditions change, there is a possibility of smoke in the air. The smoke may not necessarily be cause for alarm.

Essential contact information will be provided to assist with issues such as utility connections and protective services (i.e. gas, power, water, phone, police, fire, EMS).

Community Information Centres will open in various locations to provide a variety of services and information, including mental-health supports. Locations will be listed online before May 31.

What residents returning home should bring:

If possible, bring a three- to seven-day supply of food for you and your pets – including drinking water – as a “boil-water” advisory will remain in place. Your fridge/freezer may not be usable so it is advisable to bring non-perishable goods. You may wish to bring a cooler for perishable items.

Some pharmacies and the hospital will be functional at basic levels; however, please fill prescriptions before returning to your community.

Bring long-sleeved shirts, long pants and rubber boots

Bring flashlights and batteries

Bring a camera and/or video camera to document any damage to your property for insurance purposes

Bring hand soap and/or hand sanitizer (at least 60 per cent alcohol)

Transitional Housing

If your home was destroyed or severely damaged, government is working on a plan to support your housing needs on an interim basis.

Quick facts

Damage Assessment Stats:

19,244 structures have been assessed

1,921 have been destroyed

17,156 are OK to occupy

121 are limited to restricted use

39 are unsafe to occupy/enter

Seven are still to be inspected