The wildfire that devastated the Fort McMurray region this week is expected to trigger the largest insured property losses from a single disaster in Canadian history.

With an estimated 1,600 homes, small businesses and other structures destroyed in the inferno — more than four times the number of homes lost in the disastrous Slave Lake fire — insurance losses could range as high as $9.3 billion.

That estimate is from BMO Capital Markets analyst Tom MacKinnon, who said in a report that a “more reasonable” estimate would peg total losses in the Fort McMurray area between $2.6 billion and $4.7 billion, which assumes that 25 to 50 per cent of all the housing units were destroyed.

Even if one uses those more conservative estimates as a guide, however, the cost of the unfolding disaster is likely to be “by far the largest potential catastrophe loss in Canadian history,” he said. It would far outstrip the $742 million in insured losses stemming from the 2011 Slave Lake fire. The floods that struck Calgary and other parts of southern Alberta in 2013 — which led to total insured losses of about $3.2 billion — currently rank it as the single most costly disaster in the country’s history.

Initial estimates of insured losses often tend to be low, one expert warned. And that could push the ultimate price tag for the Fort McMurray disaster toward the mid or high end of MacKinnon’s current range of estimates.

“The best way to do these estimates is to survey insurance companies, and that takes time,” said Glenn McGillivray, managing director of the Toronto-based Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.

“But there are people who try to use models (to estimate insured losses) and the models have proven to be inaccurate. No matter what catastrophe you’re talking about, they almost always come up light,” he said.

A key factor that tends to drive costs up is “demand surge,” McGillivray said. “So when you get a big loss, the price of contractors and building materials often goes up because demand is so high. That’s sometimes hard to capture in models.”