As the wildfire evacuation order in Fort McMurray enters its second day, the main form of support offered by the military will likely be air support — but the commander in charge of Joint Task Force West says the situation is “dynamic.”

“That will all depend on the needs so I can’t speculate at this time,” said Brig.-Gen. Wayne Eyre when asked whether the 15 or so military personnel currently deployed to help in Alberta could be joined by others. “The numbers are very much in flux.”

Highway 63, the only road in and out of Fort McMurray, has been closed intermittently south of the city toward Edmonton. When that happens, evacuees are being told to head north to the oilsands camps; those people will need to be moved as soon as possible.

Alberta Premier Rachel Notley asked for help with evacuating those people and transporting fire equipment last night.

Two Griffon helicopters are on the ground in Fort McMurray now, Eyre said. There is one Hercules transport plane set to depart from the Canadian Forces base in Cold Lake as needed; several others on standby at the base in Trenton.

The Griffons are being pulled in from 408 Squadron in Edmonton and 4 Wing Cold Lake, he said.

It’s not clear at this point whether other resources could be sent to assist, such as military members or reservists.

Alberta is currently at Level 4 emergency status, meaning it is activating its emergency assistance agreements with other provinces to allow them to send firefighters and other aid.

When asked whether the military could assist with coordinating the transport of those firefighters, Eyre said that request has not yet been made but officials will evaluate the situation as it evolves.

“We are the force of last resort,” Eyre said. “That’s quite possible if the civilian capacity doesn’t exist.”

Dan Lebouthiller, spokesperson for the Department of National Defence, said the military is prepared to adapt to whatever the situation requires.

“Other assets remain ready to respond if required,” he said.

The army aims to deploy within 12 hours of receiving a request for assistance and reservists would deploy within several days if required, Eyre says.

“Those troops are standing by should the call come again,” he said.

The military reserves deployed to assist with the 2013 Alberta floods and the 2015 Saskatchewan forest fires.

Auditor General Michael Ferguson raised concerns Tuesday in his spring report about whether those forces were adequately trained and equipped for their missions.

He pointed to the Saskatchewan fires as an instance where medical and fitness tests for reservists were waived despite the “potentially hazardous mission.”

Eyre, the commander who waived the test requirements, said Wednesday that call was a “low risk decision” and that the reservists were able to integrate seamlessly with the regular force on the ground.