By Chang Wen-chuan and Jason Pan / Staff reporter, with staff writer

Premier Jiang Yi-huah (江宜樺) is to appear in the Taipei District Court today after being accused of attempted murder by Sunflower activists who were beaten by police after occupying the Executive Yuan.

It is the first time a premier has been accused of attempted murder and summoned to face charges, although prosecutors have not charged Jiang.

Jiang’s codefendants in the private prosecution include National Police Agency (NPA) Director-General Wang Cho-chiun (王卓鈞), Taipei Police Commissioner Huang Sheng-yung (黃昇勇) and Zhongzheng First Police Precinct Chief Fang Yang-ning (方仰寧).

They have all been summoned to appear in court this afternoon.

A number of students and members of the public were beaten and injured by riot police on the night of March 23 and early the following morning after a small group of protesters stormed the Executive Yuan, briefly occupying it before being evicted by police.

The confrontation at the Executive Yuan came five days after protesters occupied the Legislative Yuan’s main chamber to protest against the government’s handling of the cross-strait service trade agreement.

Lawyers representing 23 injured protesters filed suit against Jiang and the three police officials on charges of attempted murder, coercion and causing bodily harm. The plaintiffs alleged riot police used truncheons and struck them on their heads with force.

Jiang was named because he ordered police to remove the occupiers of the Executive Yuan by force.

The Executive Yuan yesterday said Jiang and his codefendants are to appear in court this afternoon to answer questions.

Lin Fei-fan (林飛帆) and Chen Wei-ting (陳為廷), two prominent Sunflower movement leaders, said they will be present outside the court to lend support to the plaintiffs.

Other leading Sunflower movement figures, student groups and rights organizations have said they will also mobilize members to go to the courthouse.

Zhongzheng First Police Precinct officials said they have called for reinforcements to provide security and protect the defendants, and to prevent any trouble at the courthouse.

Lee Po-chang (李柏璋), a well-known Sunflower movement figure, posted “Death to Tyranny!” on Facebook yesterday after it was announced that Jiang would appear in court.