× State gives residents preparation tips for hurricanes as Joaquin nears

HARTFORD – Connecticut residents and businesses are reminded to be prepared for the potential of hurricane activity as Joaquin strengthened to a hurricane Wednesday morning near the Bahamas.

Gov. Dan Malloy released the following statement Wednesday:

“We are monitoring the storm closely, and our state emergency management officials have been in regular contact with the national weather service. While there are many variables with this storm, we are paying close attention to its track. Just as the state and its agencies are monitoring the weather and preparing appropriately, residents should do the same and closely watch forecasts over the next few days.”

The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to November 30. The principal threat period for Connecticut is from mid-August to mid-October, according to state officials.

The state’s Department of Emergency Services and Public Protection advises that every home and business have a basic emergency plan that can be used for any emergency. Here are some of the department’s tips:

Recommended items to include in a basic emergency supply kit:

One gallon of water per person per day for at least three days, for drinking and sanitation

At least a three-day supply of non-perishable food

Battery-powered or hand crank radio and a NOAA Weather Radio with tone alert and extra batteries for both

Flashlight and extra batteries

First aid kit

A whistle to signal for help

Dust mask, to help filter contaminated air and plastic sheeting and duct tape to shelter-in-place

Moist towelettes, garbage bags and plastic ties for personal sanitation

Wrench or pliers to turn off utilities

Can opener for food (if kit contains canned food)

Local maps

Cell phone with chargers, inverter or solar charger

Family emergency plan

Pick an out-of-town contact to communicate among separated family members. It may be easier call long-distance than to call across town.

Be sure every member of your family knows the contact’s phone number and has a way to call the person. If you have a cell phone, program that person as “ICE” (in case of emergency). If you are in an accident, emergency personnel will often check your ICE listings in order to get a hold of someone you know.

Teach family members how to use text messaging. Text messages can often get around network disruptions when a phone call can’t get through.

Subscribe to alert services. Many communities/states now have systems that will send instant text alerts or e-mails to let you know about bad weather, road closings, local emergencies, etc. Connecticut offers alerts here.

For more information on hurricane preparedness click here or here.

Also beware of backed up storm drains, which can cause urban flooding.

“You’ve heard proper planning prevents poor performance,” said Doug Hausladen, who is in charge of traffic for the city of New Haven. “So what we’re asking folks to do is to watch your storm drains in the fall.