NASSAU, The Bahamas -- The following is the latest assessment, as of 8:30 p.m. EDT, on October 2, 2105, provided by the National Emergency Management Agency, in co-ordination with local government officials from islands affected by Hurricane Joaquin:

In Rum Cay, it is reported that 32 persons were seeking shelter in the clinic, and they are anticipating an increase in that number. At the time of the report, the island was said to be experiencing heavy rains with limited visibility, winds estimated at 90-100 mph, and heavy flooding. Trees were down, roads impassable, lines and poles were down, dock reportedly destroyed, airport flooded and personal homes were beginning to cave in. There was no electricity.

In Acklins, Administrator Mr. Harvey Roberts reported that he encountered flooding in certain, specifically in Snug Corner and Mason’s Bay. Five houses were destroyed in Mason’s Bay, and four in Snug Corner; but there were no injuries to report and all residents were accounted for in the visited settlements.

According to information obtained by the Red Cross, Long Island had no electricity, private wells were reportedly contaminated, roads were impassable, and there was complete structural damages to many homes. Inspector Rodgers added that the northern part of island appeared to be under four (4) feet of water and that he had to leave station and move to higher ground.

Mr. Paul Turnquest reported that, in San Salvador, 36 people were sheltered at the Research Center, 32 people at the Odell Jones Center, and 4 people at St. James Native Center.

The roof of the Zion Baptist Church shelter was blown off, doors off and water was coming in, with 14 children and 15 adults. The sheltered persons were advised to relocate to a portion of the building with a roof remaining. Winds were reported at 130-150 mph, with flooding throughout the island, and the island was expected to lose communications by 5pm, as the BTC generator was reportedly going down.

At 3: 46 pm. Mr. Jermaine Johnson, Tourism representative, was attempting to move the shelterees from Zion Baptist Church. NEMA is awaiting confirmation as to where they are relocated.

In Harbour Island and North Eleuthera Administrator Mr. Jolton Johnson reported that 21 people were in shelters in Harbour Island and 10 people were in shelters in North Eleuthera. While in Central and South Eleuthera, the shelters there were reporting 71 occupants.

Mayaguana is reporting that the wind has settled, with not much damage to structures other than loss of roof shingles; communications is still available.

In Mangrove Cay, Administrator Mr. Glenn Lightbourne reported that two shelters activated, with one occupant. Winds were normal with overcast skies. Communications and power were still available.

In Exuma, shelters were activated with two occupants. Electricity and communication were still available.

On Cat Island, Sgt. Preston McCoy said that shelters activated, with nine (9) occupants; while on San Salvador, shelters were activated with 48 people. That island was experiencing winds reported at 130-140 mph.

Attempts are still being made to contact Crooked Island.

All of the relevant government and non-governmental agencies, including the Bahamas Red Cross and US Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA), of The Bahamas are standing by to do a rapid assessment as soon as the weather permits and NEMA will be advising the public on an ongoing basis as to all efforts to bring relief to the affected areas.