Share this Share this Mister Wong Digg Del.icio.us Slashdot Furl Yahoo Technorati Newsvine Googlize this Blinklist Facebook Wikio

Export PDF

Export PDF Print

Print E-mail HIGHLIGHTS: CDEMA finalizes arrangements for three Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment Teams for the Bahamas.

Relief supplies dispatched to the Southern Bahamas via the RFA Lyme Bay

1 person reported missing in Bahamas

Joaquin claims 1 life in Haiti

Joaquin predicted to pass to the west of Bermuda

Joaquin expected to produce additional rainfall over the Bahamas and Bermuda

Damage assessment process continues for the Turks and Caicos Islands THE SITUATION:

Swells generated by Joaquin will continue to affect portions of the Bahamas during the next few days. The Bahamas NATIONAL ACTIONS

The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) National Emergency Operations Center (NEOC) and the National Disaster Preparedness and Response Plan remain activated. The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) and the National Disaster Committee (NDC) conducted two exclusive press briefings in collaboration with The Prime Minister and Cabinet Officers. The Royal Bahamas Defence Force, Operations Department has been deployed and continues to support several islands. IMPACTS DAMAGE ASSESSMENT AND NEEDS ANALYSIS

Damage assessment and needs analysis (DANA) are ongoing. Data is currently being collated at the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC). Aerial reconnaissance will continue today. Power and communications: Exist in remaining family islands which have not reported any significant damages or service interruptions. The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) has provided the following initial report based on the collaborative efforts between the National Disaster Committees (NDC) and Family Islands Disaster Consultative Committees and The Bahamas Information Services. Rum Cay: There have been reports of significant structural damage to homes and buildings. The dock is completely destroyed however the airstrip is accessible.

There have been reports of significant structural damage to homes and buildings. The dock is completely destroyed however the airstrip is accessible. Acklins Island: The runway at Acklins is now clear of debris; however commercial flights have not received the “All Clear” to land or take off. An estimated 20 homes are totally destroyed and residents have been evacuated. The clinic has sustained severe flood damage. The Bahamas Electricity Corporation (BEC) confirmed technicians were attempting to restore the lines in Delectable Bay. Electrical poles were down in Lovely Bay. The main bridge was completely destroyed.

The runway at Acklins is now clear of debris; however commercial flights have not received the “All Clear” to land or take off. An estimated 20 homes are totally destroyed and residents have been evacuated. The clinic has sustained severe flood damage. The Bahamas Electricity Corporation (BEC) confirmed technicians were attempting to restore the lines in Delectable Bay. Electrical poles were down in Lovely Bay. The main bridge was completely destroyed. Crooked Island and Long Cay: Reports reveal that 70% of Crooked Island is flooded with approximately 5ft of water in some areas and there is an island wide power outage. A significant amount of buildings and homes are damaged.

Reports reveal that 70% of Crooked Island is flooded with approximately 5ft of water in some areas and there is an island wide power outage. A significant amount of buildings and homes are damaged. Long Island: The Clarence town dock is an accessible point of entry as the airport remains closed due to flooding. Attempts are being made to clear roads from Deadman’s Cay to Sella Maris and to provide relief via sea planes to these areas.

The Clarence town dock is an accessible point of entry as the airport remains closed due to flooding. Attempts are being made to clear roads from Deadman’s Cay to Sella Maris and to provide relief via sea planes to these areas. San Salvador: The airport building at San Salvador has been completely destroyed but the runway is now clear and can be accessed. There has been significant damage to homes and San Salvador Royal Bahamas Defense Force reported that there were 84 persons at the Odell Center, Cockburn Town and 104 persons at the Research Center in United Estates.

The airport building at San Salvador has been completely destroyed but the runway is now clear and can be accessed. There has been significant damage to homes and San Salvador Royal Bahamas Defense Force reported that there were 84 persons at the Odell Center, Cockburn Town and 104 persons at the Research Center in United Estates. Mayaguana: Limited communication link exist. Efforts continue to establish full capability. There has been minor damage to home structures including loss of roofing shingles.

Limited communication link exist. Efforts continue to establish full capability. There has been minor damage to home structures including loss of roofing shingles. Exuma: Power lines down and extreme flooding have been reported.

Power lines down and extreme flooding have been reported. Harbour Island and North Eleuthera: Docks and airports are accessible. There are power outages in Harbour Island due to fallen power lines.

Docks and airports are accessible. There are power outages in Harbour Island due to fallen power lines. Ragged Island: 1 male has been reported missing. INITIAL NEEDS

NEMA has indicated a need for the following initial assistance for limited island districts. Need quantification will be informed by the damage assessment process: Food

Water

Emergency shelter

Aerial Reconnaissance

Damage Assessment support in the South and Central Islands of the Bahamas

Electricity Restoration

Water and Sewerage restoration Haiti

Initial reports coming out of from Directorate of Civil Protection (DPC) indicate: Weather Situation

While the island of Haiti is not affected by the major portion of the system, outlying bands continue to influence the weather over much of the country including the regions in the West and North areas. NATIONAL ACTIONS

The National Meteorological Centre first issued a notice on flooding, landslides and mudslides on Wednesday, September 30. The Civil Protection Department has issued regular weather information bulletins of the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial Communities. Contact with the Departments was maintained. 297 people checked into four temporary shelters in the Northwest and in the Nippes between Friday and Saturday. Affected Departments Grande Saline

Significant flooding in the town centre was reported due to storm surge. There were a number of fallen trees due to powerful winds. Upper Artibonite

An assessment team was deployed in the field on Saturday. Flooding of more than 100 homes in coastal towns, especially in Gonaives (Raboteau and K- Sun) and Anse-Rouge (L'Etang and Coridon) following a high tide. NIPPES

354 families were affected, of which 277 experienced flooding. There was loss of 11 livestock. Anse-à-veau

Significant destruction to the banana and millet fields was reported. Flooding also reported in the lower city. 90 people were housed in shelters. The Azile

Several sections of the road have been damaged namely, Nan Paul Nan Bannann, Changeux, Sanai, Tournade, and Saline. 7 people were evacuated in downtown areas and accommodated in shelters. Grand Boucan

The dock was severely damaged by waves. Petit Trou de Nippes

A boat capsized on Friday morning between Petit-Trou de Nippes and Grand Boucan, with two fishermen on board. One of them, a man in his thirties, drowned. Anse-à-Foleur, Port-de-Paix, Turtle Island and North St. Louis

Moderate flooding of the Three Rivers River.

Flooding of coastal areas (High Furnace, Djerilon, Nan hoist Detipodpe) due to high waves. Port-de-Paix

Evacuation of occupants of houses flooded in Nan hoist and Djerilon neighborhoods.

Activation of two shelters: National School Adophin Eugene Jean Baptiste Amelia National School to host about 200 evacuees.

Twelve Civil Protection volunteers have been mobilised to facilitate the evacuees. WEST Together

An assessment team was deployed. SOUTH Together

The English river was flooded. The banana gardens were devastated by winds in Saint John South and Tiburon. Gullies have overflowed.

Two families have been evacuated and placed with relatives due to flooding in 44 Carrerfour. South St. Louis

A house has collapsed in the 4th communal section. Landslides have been recorded in four locations.

Tet Pak Nan Kajou gully has overflowed. Alluvium spilled on National Road #2. Turks and Caicos Islands

The Department of Disaster Management and Emergencies has reported that damage assessments are ongoing. REGIONAL ACTIONS

The Regional Response Mechanism (RRM) remains activated. Regional response actions have been undertaken in accordance with the Regional Coordination Plan and the CDEMA Operational Plan for Hurricane Joaquin. Based on a request from the Government of The Bahamas, the CDEMA system Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment efforts will be targeted to Acklins Island, Crooked Island and Long Island. The CDEMA CU is finalizing three Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment Teams to support the Bahamas. These teams are scheduled to be deployed tomorrow October 5th, 2015 to Nassau. The skills set for each team include a team leader, response coordination assessment and information management, housing assessment, coastal zone assessment, critical facilities and infrastructure assessment and water, sanitation and housing. Each team will be led by CDEMA and supported by representatives from the following CDEMA Participating States and other Regional and International agencies have been confirmed: Barbados

Jamaica

Virgin Islands (British)

Caribbean Public Health Agency (CARPHA)

Pan American Health Organisation (PAHO)

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA)

The Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development, Canada Through the support of the CDEMA North Western Sub-Regional focal point - Jamaica and the Government of the United Kingdom, the RFA Lyme Bay departed Kingston, Jamaica at 4:45PM on October 3rd, 2015 to deliver the following emergency supplies to the three islands previously identified for assistance (Acklins Island, Crooked Island and Mayaguana). Relief supplies are expected to be delivered on Monday October 5, 2015. 14,000 lbs of cereal products and 85 cases of pasta

1,260 cans of canned meat and vegetables

3000 bottles of water

200 cases of tarpaulins

102 Blankets The public is advised to Monitor radio or television and other official sources of information for progress reports

Update your personal family preparedness plan and action items according to that plan

The website www.weready.org provides additional information CONTACT DETAILS: The CDEMA CU 24-hour contact number 1(246) 434-4880 Back to Top