Hurricane Joaquin - Situation Report #7 as of 3:30 pm on October 9th 2015 Share this Share this Mister Wong Digg Del.icio.us Slashdot Furl Yahoo Technorati Newsvine Googlize this Blinklist Facebook Wikio

Export PDF

Export PDF Print

Print E-mail HIGHLIGHTS on Impacts in Haiti (ONLY) as at Monday 5th October 2015: 4 temporary shelters closed in the north-west and Nippes

110 mattresses, 100 hygiene kits, 50 sheets and 250 food kits were distributed to evacuees in Port-de-Paix from the Civil Protection Directorate contingency stock

About 900 families in the areas of Artibonite, Nippes, North-West and South affected and 1 killed in Petit-Trou de Nippes

332 families from Gonaives, Anse-Rouge and Gors Morne were affected in Upper Artibonite THE SITUATION:

On September 30th, 2015, Hurricane Joaquin became the tenth named hurricane of the 2015 Atlantic Hurricane Season which affected the CDEMA Participating States of the Bahamas (southern and central Islands), the Turks and Caicos Islands and Haiti. CNM, together with the Permanent Secretariat of Risk Management and Disaster (SPGRD), advised the population in at risk areas to undertake the necessary in the event of heavy rains. On 1st and 2nd October, the system resulted in low to high intensity intermittent showers and light to strong winds in some parts of the country. Rough seas were reported on the northern and southern coasts of the country, and in the Gulf of Gonâve. The situation improved significantly within 72 hours. HAITI NATIONAL ACTIONS

The National Meteorological Centre stopped issuing notices to floods, landslides and mudslides on Sunday 4th October. The Civil Protection Department continues transmitting regular bulletins of weather information to the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial Communities, according to established lines of communication. IMPACTS ARTIBONITE

Lower Artibonite: No reports of damage Grande Saline: Assessment teams were deployed Upper Artibonite: 332 affected families identified in three towns: Gonaives, Anse-Rouge, and Gros Morne. Their homes were flooded and / or damaged by the waves that have penetrated about 500 meters from the coast in places.

Up to Monday, the main road leading to Anse-Rouge was impassible preventing traffic to neighbouring localities. NIPPES

Entire department 496 hygiene kits distributed to 200 households from the central warehouse in Port-au-Prince. The Azile Temporary shelter closed and the shelterees have since returned to their homes. Petite Riviere de Nippes No reports of injuries or loss of life. Plaisance Progressive Restoration of traffic on roads where landslides occurred. NORTHWEST

Entire department Moderate Subsidence of the Three Rivers river

Gradual recovery of commercial activities in all municipalities. Port-de-Paix 110 mattresses, 100 hygiene kits, 50 sheets and 250 food kits from the Civil Protection Directorate contingency stock were distributed to evacuees.

Hot food was distributed to sheltered persons by the Mayor of Port-de-Paix.

Water was provided by DINEPA in both activated shelters.

Aqua-tabs were distributed to households by WASH Team of the NGO Action against Hunger.

Intervention of the NGO ACF for decontamination shelters. WEST

Entire department Back to normal. SOUTH

Entire department Gradual return to normal RECOMMENDATIONS

Civil Protection Branch recommends the following for Haiti: Continue assessments, to identify needs and conduct response actions by sector. Review the national contingency plan;

Strengthen monitoring of the sea and coasts;

Remain vigilant as we are still in the hurricane season, which has just reached its peak (September, October)

Build awareness by focusing on the risks of epidemics, including cholera In support of Haiti’s recommendations, the CDEMA CU is advising the public to: Monitor radio or television and other official sources of information for progress reports

Update your personal family preparedness plan and action items according to that plan

The website www.weready.org provides additional information CONTACT DETAILS: The CDEMA CU 24-hour contact number 1(246) 434-4880

Back to Top