The 2015 Atlantic hurricane season, with overall activity about 35 percent below normal, has met the quiet preseason expectations. But forecasters have stressed inactive seasons can produce nasty storms and Hurricane Joaquin proved their point. And the season isn’t over.

Through October 12, 10 named storms and three hurricanes – two of them becoming major hurricanes (Category 3 or higher) – have been born in the Atlantic.

Of all these storms, Joaquin was the strongest, by far. Let’s review its fairly unique evolution.

Joaquin’s origins could be traced all the way back to around September 17-18 as an upper-level low pressure system that came off the coast of the Carolinas. While tropical development from these kinds of upper-level lows is not unheard of, it is rare for storms of that pedigree to become nearly Category 5 hurricanes.

Here is a quick timeline of Joaquin’s life cycle:

Sept 18: Upper-level low identifiable

Sept 25: Becomes disturbance of interest, or “Invest”

Sept 28: Upgraded to tropical depression

Sept 29: Upgraded to tropical storm

Sept 30: Upgraded to hurricane

Oct 1: Upgraded to major hurricane

Oct 3: Strengthens to 155 mph (135 knots), just short of Category 5 status

Oct 7: Weakens to tropical storm

Oct 8: Final advisory written as extratropical cyclone



Water vapor images at select milestones in Joaquin’s lifecycle leading up to its peak intensity. (images from NRLMRY)

As of today, the post-tropical Joaquin was still identifiable on satellite over Spain and Portugal:

Latest NASA satellite pic shows ex-hurricane Joaquin over Spain & Portugal & the low bringing #snow to E Europe. Jo pic.twitter.com/Jm34JA4dGw — BBC Weather (@bbcweather) October 12, 2015

Joaquin was the strongest hurricane in the Atlantic since Igor in 2010. It was the first major hurricane to impact the Bahamas since Ike in 2008. It maintained hurricane intensity up to 40.5°N (same latitude as Long Island, NY).

In terms of Accumulated Cyclone Energy, or ACE, Joaquin racked up the same amount as all nine previous named storms combined! That brings 2015 up to approximately 65 percent of an average season by this date — so still decidedly “quiet” overall.



Average seasonal cumulative ACE (purple) and 2015’s accumulation so far (yellow).

Even in distant ‘model-land’, the Atlantic looks quiet, and with a very strong El Niño in high gear in the central and eastern Pacific Ocean, tropical Atlantic activity should remain suppressed for the rest of the season. However, suppressed does not necessarily mean dead.

October is historically still a month when extremely powerful hurricanes have formed and some of those made landfall. As Joaquin proved, we can still get very intense storms even though the overall seasonal activity is below average.

Recent October hurricanes that reached Category 4-5 intensity are:

Gonzalo 2014

Omar 2008

Wilma 2005

Michelle 2001

Iris 2001

Mitch 1998