PPP vows not to support any step against democracy 08 August, 2014



ISLAMABAD: Leader of the opposition in the National Assembly, Khursheed Shah on Thursday blamed the elements "more loyal than the king for the mess created in the country" and warned all parliamentary parties to avoid taking any step against democracy that would place their names in the list of dictators. Starting the debate on the address of President Mamnoon Hussain to the joint session of parliament on June 2, 2014 Shah said that all the political parties have faith in supremacy of parliament, and clarified that defending the cause of democracy did not mean protecting the government. He termed the present situation very dangerous, noting that people fear derailment of democratic system in the next few days. He urged all political parties to act to remove these apprehensions. About the struggle for democracy, Shah said that it is not always easy to restore democracy and credited the former PPP government for restoring and strengthening it "through reconciliation and sacrifices". The opposition leader advised the government to politically deal with the present political circumstances in the country and pointed out that media reports suggest that its machinery is involved in seizing motorbikes as well as petrol pumps due to the fear of the long march of the PTI on August 14. "Please do not worry regarding the long march of the PTI as it is the constitutional right of any political party in the country," he said. Shah assured the House that the PPP believes in the supremacy of parliament and will not favour any step against democracy. Meanwhile, PTI leader Javed Hashmi said that the government should try to handle the situation responsibly because it is very critical. MQM leader Farooq Sattar called for resolving the issues through mature political attitude and advised the government to refrain from registering cases against political leadership. Awami Muslim League leader Sheikh Rasheed Ahmed said that the government should not create problems for the workers of the political parties due to the fear of the upcoming long march. He demanded the speaker should given a ruling against the implementation of Article 245 in the capital. PTI Leader Ghulam Sarwar Khan said that the government should avoid seizing petrol pumps and vehicles of the transporters due to the fear of long march on August 14. Latter, State Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Sheikh Aftab Ahmed said that the country is being ruled under a constitution and the government will not put any kind of restriction on the basic right of the freedom of speech in the country. "Why did the PTI members took oath as members of the National Assembly if they did not believe in the mandate of the ruling government?" he questioned. "If the PTI leadership does not believe in the results of the elections of May 11 then why did it set up its government in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa," he remarked. During the proceedings, power went out that prompted the opposition benches to shout against the government. It was, however, restored within seconds. End.