LAHORE (Dunya News) – As nation celebrates Independence Day, thousands of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf (PTI) workers and activists began their march towards federal capital against the alleged rigging in general elections 2013 on Thursday.

The march has been set off in a bid to oust the PML-N government and hold mid-term elections under the ‘non-political’ caretaker government.

A large number of PTI workers including women and children gathered at Zaman Park, Imran Khan’s residence, to participate in the long march.

Imran Khan left his residence at 12:30PM after holding special prayers for the success of the rally. Addressing the rally, he urged the masses to participate in the rally for their own good.

The PTI chief will make another address to the workers at Faisal Chowk where he would leave for Islamabad.

It is important to mention that Javed Hashmi has also joined the march.

In his latest tweet, Imran Khan said that freedom can only be achieved through struggle.

Freedom can only be won thru struggle;it is not handed on a platter. Today is decisive to liberate ourselves. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 14, 2014

He also said that it was just the beginning to end monarchy from the country.

Today will be the beginning of the end of despots & monarchs, InshaAllah. True democracy means true freedom. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 14, 2014

Apparently, the government has allowed PTI to hold its Azadi March. However, all the entry and exit points of Rawalpindi and Islamabad have been completely sealed while heavy contingents of police, Rangers and FC personnel are deployed at sensitive points.

On the other hand, the Islamabad administration has allowed PTI to hold their Azadi March on Zero Point.

According to sources, the PTI’s office in-charge Captain (R) Hassan and Islamabad administration held talks over the venue of long march. The PTI had requested for Kashmir Highway or Serena Chowk. However, the police expressed their concerns over holding march on Serena Chowk. The PTI assured the admin that the protest will remain peaceful after which the officials granted permission for Zero Point.

There are also reports that police has continued its crackdown against the PTI workers. Ten more PTI workers were detained in Attock early morning.

Air surveillance was also carried out in Zaman Park.

Rawalpindi-Peshawar Road near Margala bypass has been sealed by placing containers.

Hundreds of PTI workers left for Zaman Park from different cities of Punjab on Wednesday night

A convoy of hundreds of vehicles 500 vehicles left early Thursday from Tank to participate in PTI’s sit-in in Islamabad. Tribal men of South Waziristan also joined the rally.

As per the route, the convoy will pass through Lakki Marwat, Bannu, Kohat and Peshawar.

Free transport has been provided to the locals who earlier registered themselves to join Khan’s protest.

