Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI) Chairman Imran Khan wants anarchy in the name of ‘Azadi March’, said Federal Minister for Planning, Development and Reforms Professor Ahsan Iqbal while talking to the media after the award giving ceremony of the 100th National Management Course (NMC) and 15th Senior Management Course (SMC) at National School of Public Policy on Thursday.

Ahsan advised the PTI chairman to give time, if he had few minutes, to more than 8,00,000 Internal Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa who had left their homes for the better future of the country and where his party was ruling.

He expressed his astonishment over time and money being spent by the PTI chief for political rallies and alleged he was holding such rallies for political instability in the country.

The minister urged Khan to take caravans to help IDPs instead of Islamabad as Pakistan was unable to bear any instability especially when the government was working to bring billion dollars of investment to the country under Sino-Pak economic corridor.

“Does Imran want to threaten investors?” he questioned.

He said political issues and differences could be resolved in the parliament as the PTI had representatives in the parliament, adding that message of unity and responsibility was needed on Independence Day.

To a question, he said the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) had no connection with the criticism by Arsalan Iftikhar over Imran Khan and it was their own issue as Imran, earlier, criticised Arsalan and his father, former chief justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, during his speeches.

Ahsan said that it was time to discuss the solutions of common national problems like load shedding, unemployment and terrorism.

To a question about Dr Tahirul Qadri, he said the government felt no danger from him as his agenda was negative and the government was working on real positive agenda of industrial, export and educational revolution.

Earlier, in his address to the participants of the courses, he said that unfortunately, performance of managers of the country had not remained exemplary and results of work and progress in the country were embarrassing.

“The nation does not need managers, it needs leaders,” he added.

Citing the poor performance of all sectors of management, the minister urged the participants to work hard on new ideas for the prosperity of the country.

He said that “status quo” was no more an option as it was time to work with new eye, new behaviour and for change in the country. He hoped the participants would work with their potentials for the prosperity of the nation.