GUJRANAWALA: Activists of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) and ruling Pakistan Muslim League-N (PML-N) clashed in Gujranwala after stones were allegedly thrown on Azadi March convoy, SAMAA reported Friday.

PTI spokesman said some local activists from the ruling party threw stones on vehicles of PTI march at Sheranwala Bridge in Gujranwala city.

The stone-pelting triggered a clash between supporters from both the side, turning G.T Road area into battlefield.

Two PTI workers are reported injured.

Police arrived at the site and attempted to control the situation, but failed to disperse the charged mob.

Reports said PTI Chairman Imran Khan’s container was also pelted with stones.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation and appealed to PML-N workers to remain calm.

Imran Khan has expressed his anger over the incident, saying that the government is worsening the situation deliberately. “Nawaz Sharif will be responsible in anything happened,” he warned.

He said PML-N workers had also attacked a vehicle of PTI leader Khurshid Kasuri in Gujranwala.

Earlier today, the ‘Azadi March’ received a warm welcome by PTI supporters on his arrival in Gujranwala, the city said to be a hub of ruling PML-N.

The rally, on its way to Islamabad, is stuck in the city due to chaos.

PTI chief is leading thousands of his supporters to Islamabad in a bid to unseat the ruling PML-N government which they claim was elected by fraud.



Workers of Khan and populist preacher Tahir-ul-Qadri massed separately and began a march from Lahore to Islamabad on Thursday.

On their way to 300-kilometre journey to rally in Islamabad, the two groups travelling in motorised convoys are slowly moving forward.

The marches are now expected to reach the heavily-guarded capital some time on Friday.

Both Khan and Qadri claim the May 2013 general election was rigged and want Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to resign and hold new polls.

Qadri is also on his way to Islamabad with a large number of supporters. – SAMAA

Published in Pakistan

Story first published: 15th August 2014