ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – A four-member delagtion of Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) will meet Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on the invitation of the federal government in Islamabad today (Thursday).

As the pressure on the government is constantly building up, government has started seeking refuge in the consulting other political parties.

MQM has finalized the names of Dr. Farooq Sattar, Khalid Maqbool Saddique, Babar Ghaur and Naveed Jameel to represent MQM in the meeting whereas Governor Sindh Dr. Ishrat-ul-Ibad has also reached Islamabad and is likely to attend the meeting.

According to the sources, the delegation will advise PM Nawaz Sharif to fend off the prevailing political tensions through dialogue. Also, chief MQM Altaf Hussain while addressing the parliamentary committee meeting via telephone on Wednesday pronounced that both, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) and Pakistan Awami Tehreek (PAT), reserve the right to protest.

Earlier, a six-member delegation of Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM) had met Pakistan Awami Tehreek (PAT) chief Dr. Tahir ul Qadri on August 1 in Lahore at Dr. Qadri’s residence in Model Town. MQM delegation was led by veteran MQM leader Syed Haider Abbas Rizvi.

While talking to media after the meeting, Haider Abbas Rizvi said that Dr. Tahir ul Qadri and MQM Chief Altaf Hussain have similar vision. “Altaf Hussain, like Tahir ul Qadri, also talks of revolution”, he said.

Haider Abbas Rizvi said that MQM supports the idea of revolution but the decision about joining Tahir ul Qadri’s call will be put before MQM Rabita Committee.

Commenting on Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)’s long march, scheduled for August 14, Haider Abbas Rizvi said that the government should not take any steps to stop the long march.

Government has called Army in Islamabad by invoking Article 245. It is being alleged by the opposition parties that the Article 245 has been invoked in order to stop the long march. Interior Minister Chaudhry Nisar has denied the reports saying that the move has been made only to give legal cover to the Army’s presence in Islamabad. Government has maintained that Army has just been called in the Federal Capital to prevent the possible fallout of the Operation Zarb-e-Azb.

Dr. Raheeq Abbasi of Pakistan Awami Tehreek told on this occasion that the date of Tahir ul Qadri’s ‘revolution march’ will be announced soon.

Haider Abbas Rizvi said that the meeting was not political and that the MQM delegation had only come to see Dr. Qadri and to offer condolence for the deaths of 12 innocent PAT workers who lost their lives on June 17 in a deadly clash between PAT workers and Punjab Police.

