ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) -- Arsalan Iftikhar, son of former Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, has contacted NADRA officials to receive the family registration certificate of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) Imran Khan on Monday, Dunya News reported.

Sources revealed that Arsalan Iftikhar has contacted NADRA officials and will be meeting them soon. He would demand the family registration certificate of Iran Khan. According to sources, the certificate would be an important document for reference against Imran Khan.

Arsalan Iftikhar believes that Imran Khan doesn’t meet the criteria set out in the Article 62 and 63 of the Constitution because he has hidden details of his alleged love child Tyrian. Arsalan Iftikhar has received nomination papers from the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP).

Imran Khan has always maintained silence on questions about his alleged love child Tyrian White and the 1997 US court judgement. In his several interviews, he has denied commenting on his personal life. However, the media in 2004 reported that after the sudden death of Sita White, Tyrian’s mother, Khan was ready to look after his alleged daughter and these reports in turn were not refuted by Khan. Though the case of Tyrian is now a thing of past for the politicians, it’s the only ploy for Arsalan Ifikhar against Imran Khan. He has started gathering documents against Khan including a few affidavits.

Arsalan Iftikhar, on Wednesday filed another application at Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) to obtain more information about Imran Khan.

In the application, Arsalan Iftikhar submitted the attested copies of references against Imran Khan submitted by Dr Farooq Sattar and Dr Sher Afghan Niazi, Imran Khan’s written statement and relevant documents provided to him.

He also requested the ruling of Speaker National Assembly and Election Commission’s order over reference against Imran Khan. Arsalan requested access to the said documents as per the article 19 of the constitution.

The Election Commission decided on Tuesday to handover the copies Imran Khan’s nomination papers to Arsalan Iftikhar.

A summary to hand over Khan’s documents to Arsalan Iftikhar within two days has been sent to the Chief Election Commissioner by the Election Commission.

Arsalan Iftikhar had approached the Secretary Election Commission Ishtiaq Ahmad Khan and requested the documents of PTI Chairman, Imran khan.

Arsalan Iftikhar had decided on July 7 to file reference against PTI chairman Imran Khan in Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP).

Addressing the media, Arsalan had said that Imran Khan doesn’t fulfill the qualifications specified in Article 62, 63 of the constitution to contest elections, adding that he is neither Saadiq (honest) nor Amin (righteous).

The son of former CJP held a meeting with the secretary of Election Commission in Islamabad today and submitted an application to seek nomination papers and other documents of Imran Khan.



Arsalan alleged that Imran Khan didn’t mention his daughter, allegedly a love child born out of wedlock, in papers.

According to details, Arsalan has completed the consultation process with his lawyers. Documents related to Imran Khan will also be summoned from abroad to take legal action against the PTI chief.



Imran Khan often slammed the allegations as baseless in the past and rejected the allegations again this time. PTI leadership has termed the allegation as an attempt to disrupt PTI’s ‘tsunami march’ planned to be held on August 14.

Khan had been accusing ex-CJP Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry of his involvement in the alleged rigging of May 2013 general elections.

