ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Pakistan Muslim League-N members have criticized on Saturday Imran Khan’s failure to keep his repeated promises of staying on roads with his party workers, after he left to spend night at his residence Bani Gala following his address on August 15. It was much to the disappointment of his supporters who had travelled all the way in worst weather conditions in support of their leader. Minister of Defence Khwaja Asif said “While PTI leaders enjoyed a peaceful night’s sleep in hotels and their homes, the political workers toiled in the streets faced by torrential rains all through the night.”

According to Pervez Rasheed, Pervez Khattak left the rain affectees alone in the hour of need. It may be mentioned here that sixteen people, including six children, were killed and 50 others sustained injuries in rain-related incident in different areas of Peshawar, the capital of Pakistan s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

Heavy rain lashed Peshawar and its suburbs including Rehmanabad, Nothia, Yaqatoot, Sadar, Akhunabad and other areas.

PML-N member and MNA Marvi Memon on Saturday visited rain-hit people at Lady Reading Hospital in Peshawar.



She said Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) leaders do not care about their responsibilities, adding that they have locked their offices to join long march in Islamabad.



Moreover, State Minister for Water and Power Abid Sher Ali Khan criticizing PTI leaders said that people have rejected politics of agitation. Abid Sher Ali claimed that demands of Imran Khan and Tahirul Qadri are unconstitutional. He said he has sympathies for Pervez Elahi as nobody allowed him to get into truck during Azadi March, adding that the Chaudhry brothers have been exposed before the public.

Khwaja Asif criticized the leadership of PTI and asked “What happened to Imran Khan’s promises of staying with the marchers on roads and not leaving them under any circumstances?” The entire leadership deserted the party workers and went to sleep in Serena Hotel, Bani Galla and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa House. The poor marchers, on the other hand, bore with severe weather conditions and spent sleepless night on roads in utter frustration, said Asif. Further pointing out PTI’s irresponsibility in dealing with rain victims of Peshawar, he said that CM of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Pervez Khattak left the rain victims alone in the time of need. Instead of providing assistance to the rain-hit people the CM preferred Azadi March.



Talking to Dunya News, Former Punjab Law Minister said that seeking resignation from Prime Minister is unconstitutional. He remarked that nobody can assume office through mass protests alone. If it depends on the strength of followers in protest rallies, then Qadri’s rally is much bigger than Imran Khan’s, he said.



PMLN senator Mushahid Ullah Khan said that the public has rejected the demands of Imran Khan already. The country cant work on the desire’s of a rigid person, he further claimed, adding that Imran Khan’s supporters have felt defrauded as they were deserted by their leader and his fake promises.

