LAHORE (Dunya News) – The government and Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) came on the confrontation course on Saturday when the PTI leadership insisted that the planned long march scheduled to take place on August 14 will take place as planned. PTI warned that another incident like Model Town tragedy can take place if the government tried to stop the planned long march, Dunya News reported.

PTI’s vice chairman Shah Mehmood Qureshi said that PTI had announced its ‘Azaadi March’ way before the government’s Independence Day celebrations announcement. He said the government should decide another venue for its celebrations.

He said that if the government wants to insist on its decision then it will also be responsible of the consequences.

Qureshi warned that if permission for long march is not given then the incidents like Model Town tragedy can repeat themselves.

Another PTI leader Shafquat Mehmood said that the announcement to celebrate 2-weeks long Independence Day proves government’s helplessness and panic.

PTI’s central spokesperson Shireen Mazari said that the long march will take place in any case.

Earlier, Federal Minister for Information and Broadcasting Pervaiz Rasheed, while talking to media in Lahore, also urged PTI chief Imran Khan not to give the message of ‘destruction’ on the Independence Day to the nation.

He said those criticizing the government over giving authority to the army are actually helping the terrorists.

He said only Pakistan’s flag will be hoisted at D-Chowk Islamabad on August 14, adding that leaders of all parties including Imran Khan will be invited to join the celebrations.

Information Minister said that army’s help is required to protect national installations, adding that the army was given authorities as per the constitution.

He insisted that those criticizing the army are actually helping the terrorists.

Pervaiz Rasheed said that Pakistan Awami Tehreek (PAT) chief Tahirul Qadri is stunt master, adding that he attempted to bring revolution last year too but failed.