A year after the formation of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s government, a Saturday poll found Finance Minister Yair Lapid trailing other ministers in terms of public approval, although not by much, since the ratings for most of the ministers were fairly mediocre.

Lapid came in at number 23 out of 23 ministers in the Channel 2 poll with an average approval rating of 4.19 out of 10. The most popular figure was Defense Minister Moshe Ya’alon — though his score wasn’t exceedingly high either – with 5.89 on the approval scale.

The rest of the ministers were dispersed along that spectrum.

Get The Times of Israel's Daily Edition by email and never miss our top stories Free Sign Up

Following Ya’alon was Education Minister Shai Piron of Lapid’s Yesh Atid party with 5.72. Home Front Defense and Communications Minister Gilad Erdan was at number three with 5.27, and Interior Minister Gideon Sa’ar took fourth place with 5.2. They were followed by Transportation Minister Yisrael Katz and Justice Minister Tzipi Livni with 5.17 and 5.02, respectively.

Netanyahu took seventh place in the survey with 4.89. The premier was followed by Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman at number eight with 4.88. Economy Minister Naftali Bennett and Tourism Minister Uzi Landau both received 4.72, rounding out the top ten.

Lapid, who cruised into the government on a wave of popularity a year ago, winning 19 seats for his newly formed party and coming into the Knesset as its second largest faction, has suffered a sharp erosion to his public image in the intervening period.

The minister promised to combat Israel’s high cost of living and real estate prices and to improve the country’s economic state, but many of his decisions in office have been met with public anger, with some accusing him of having failed his voters. A poll in late 2013 found him to be the most disappointing politician of the year.

The Channel 2 survey was carried out by the Shiluv Millward Brown research group among 503 participants and had a margin of error of 4.4%.

The remaining ministers in order of popularity were: Energy and Water Minister Silvan Shalom; Agriculture Minister Yair Shamir; Health Minister Yael German; Welfare Minister Meir Cohen; Pensioners Minister Uri Orbach; Science and Technology Minister Yaakov Peri; Sports and Culture Minister Limor Livnat; Environmental Protection Minister Amir Peretz; Public Security Minister Yitzhak Aharonovitch; Intelligence Minister Yuval Steinitz; Immigrant Absorption Minister Sofa Landver, and finally Housing and Construction Minister Uri Ariel – still one spot ahead of Lapid.