Ms. Livni, a former Likud politician who moved to the center and has become a strong advocate for a Palestinian state alongside Israel, described herself as a “force multiplier” to bring a change of government and “to unite the Zionist camp and end the leadership of the extreme right.”

For Mr. Netanyahu, the decision to call an early election against the backdrop of intense bickering within his coalition was beginning to look like an increasingly risky bet.

Polls have indicated that a majority of the Israeli public has had enough of Mr. Netanyahu, even though he still commands the most support as the most viable candidate for prime minister. But recent polls have also shown that a merger between Labor, Hatnua and another small centrist party that has yet to join could garner more votes than the Likud, and the gap between Mr. Netanyahu’s and Mr. Herzog’s ratings has been closing.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Even if they won more votes than the Likud, though, Mr. Herzog and Ms. Livni would almost certainly have to form a coalition themselves and might face a challenge in attracting enough other parties.

Mr. Herzog and Ms. Livni, both lawyers, are the scions of two storied figures whose careers began during the struggle for independence. At their news conference, which was timed for the evening television news broadcasts, they drew on their heritage to underline their message of harmony and cooperation.

Mr. Herzog’s father, Chaim Herzog, an Irish-born soldier, diplomat and member of Parliament with the Alignment, a precursor of the Labor Party, became Israel’s sixth president. Ms. Livni’s Polish-born father, Eitan Livni, was a commander of the Irgun, the prestate, right-wing militia that considered the larger, more mainstream military group Haganah too moderate in the fight against the British. He went on to become a Likud member of Parliament.

“The rivalry was great,” Ms. Livni said of their families’ opposite positions on the political spectrum. But she added that both she and Mr. Herzog had grown up in houses that nevertheless shared a joint vision and joint values of patriotism and Zionism.

The Likud said in a statement that it was now clear that the March 17 elections were between “the left” and “the national camp.” Danny Danon, a Likud legislator who is challenging Mr. Netanyahu for the leadership of the party, said in a statement that Ms. Livni had “broken all records in her political hypocrisy” by being in four different parties in nine years.

He added that her alliance with Mr. Herzog would be considered a “dream team” by President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority.