Rabbi Misha Zinkow at Temple Israel in Columbus, Ohio, said that one of his foremost concerns was “the lack of engagement of North American Jews with Israel” — a trend that he sees expanding among younger Jews.

“The scare tactics that emerged in the 11th hour of the election appealed to very deep anxiety and fear,” said Rabbi Zinkow, who leads a 145-year-old Reform congregation with a membership of about 550 households. “They deepen the distance and provide fodder for those who want to disengage. Those statements appealed to emotions that young American Jews just don’t have, and they sound racist.”

He was planning in his Friday night sermon to talk about the relationship between American Jews and Israel. “We’re family,” he plans to say. “Families have disagreements and disappointments and betrayal.

“Don’t let your disappointments cause you to walk away.”

The Jewish establishment’s calls for unity, however, are now competing with demands for escalated activism.

In a widely discussed opinion piece in Haaretz, Peter Beinart, a liberal critic of Israel, argued this week that those who support Israel should pressure the Obama administration to present its own peace plan “and to punish — yes, punish — the Israeli government for rejecting it.

Photo

“It means making sure that every time Benjamin Netanyahu and the members of his cabinet walk into a Jewish event outside Israel,” he wrote, “they see diaspora Jews protesting outside.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Rob Eshman, publisher and editor in chief of The Jewish Journal, a mainstream Jewish newspaper in Los Angeles, wrote this week that the election results show that Israeli and American Jews “are drifting apart.”

And on Thursday, the Conservative Jewish movement’s rabbinical arm, the Rabbinical Assembly, took the unusual step of issuing a statement condemning Mr. Netanyahu for putting out a video on social media during the election campaign warning that “right-wing rule is in danger” because Arab voters were streaming to the polls. The video was widely criticized as race-baiting, and it offended the sensibilities of American Jewish leaders who have long proclaimed with pride that Israel is a democracy in which the Arab minority has the right to vote.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Rabbi William Gershon and Rabbi Julie Schonfeld, the president and executive vice president of the Rabbinical Assembly, said, “This statement, which indefensibly singled out the Arab citizens of Israel, is unacceptable and undermines the principles upon which the State of Israel was founded.”

Mr. Netanyahu tried to explain himself in interviews on Thursday with several American outlets. “I wasn’t trying to block anyone from voting; I was trying to mobilize my own voters,” he told National Public Radio.

And of course, plenty of American Jews were not disappointed by the election results. At Congregation B’nai Israel, a politically active Reform synagogue in Sacramento, Rabbi Mona Alfi said that she had been teaching a women’s study group in the evening as the election results were coming in, and that there had been a wide range of opinions on Mr. Netanyahu’s candidacy.

Video

“One woman was really excited when it looked like Bibi was winning the exit polls,” Rabbi Alfi said. “Another was expressing hope that it would be a different result. My congregation is like the majority of American Jews. It is more of a center-left congregation on Israeli politics, but we do have a very strong contingent of Bibi supporters as well.”

Orthodox Jews are often more reliable supporters of Mr. Netanyahu and his party, Likud, and they have tended to stay loyal. Rabbi Sidney Shoham is a retired Modern Orthodox rabbi who at 86 spends his winters in a predominantly Jewish apartment building in Boca Raton, Fla., where the televisions in the gym are often tuned to Fox News. He said he and other residents cheered Mr. Netanyahu’s recent speech to the joint meeting of Congress warning President Obama against signing a nuclear deal with Iran, and he welcomed the prime minister’s re-election.

“My greatest thrill is that Netanyahu was able to pull off a feat that in my opinion was not only good for the morale of Israel and the security of Israel, but finally put Obama in his place,” said Rabbi Shoham.

He said that he saw Israel was becoming more isolated internationally, but that he was not terribly troubled by it because of what he said was a basic Jewish principle: “Being more or less in control of your own self, your own country, or your own being is much more important than being loved by others.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But as criticism of Mr. Netanyahu continues to mount — Mr. Obama directly told him Thursday that the United States would have to “reassess our options” after the prime minister’s “new positions and comments” on the two-state solution — many other Jewish leaders are deeply disturbed at the prospect of Israel as a pariah.

“Having Israel so isolated and marginalized in so many places is profoundly troubling,” said Rabbi Richard Jacobs, president of the Union for Reform Judaism. Rabbi Jacobs said that the gap between Jews in the United States and Israel was “potentially widening” and that it needed to be addressed with openness and transparency.

“I think we have to work very hard,” he said, “and do more creative and honest work to have these deep, open conversations in our Jewish community and not simply paper over differences.”