Habayit Hayehudi's primary election was held on Wednesday, one day after the Labor Party elected its candidates for the March 17 elections.

For Wednesday's updates, click here

Latest updates:

10:45 P.M. Habayit Hayehudi present election list and campaign

Habayit Hayehudi and the party's leader Naftali Bennett presented their list for the upcoming elections in Ramat Gan. Bennett presented the party's new campaign according to which they not only plan to be a part of the next government but lead it.

Keep updated: Sign up to our newsletter Email * Please enter a valid email address Sign up Please wait… Thank you for signing up. We've got more newsletters we think you'll find interesting. Click here Oops. Something went wrong. Please try again later. Try again Thank you, The email address you have provided is already registered. Close

"We will assemble the next government," MK Ayelet Shaked told the audience.

In his speech, Bennett attacked the press and stated that a Palestinian state will not be established in Eretz Israel. "The terrorists don't deserve a country, there are other parties for those who speak out against the Jewish State, but today the love of Israel is back in fashion. (Chaim Levinson)



9:51 P.M. New polls: Labor-Hatnuah slate ahead of Likud

The Labor-Hatnuah joint ticket is opening up a small lead over Likud, according to two polls released Thursday. The polls, taken after the Labor Party announced its list Wednesday, project Herzog holding an advantage of one to four seat in the next Knesset.

The Channel 10 poll gives Labor-Hatnuah 24 seats, up one from the previous poll. Likud held steady at 20 seats, followed by Habayit Hayehudi (16), a joint Arab list (12), Yesh Atid and Kulanu (10 each), UTJ (7) and Shas and Meretz (6 each). Yisrael Beiteinu slipped two seats to five. This poll projects Eli Yishai's new party, Ha'am Itanu, crossing the electoral threshold and winning four seats. (Jonathan Lis). Full article.

9:14 Arye Deri calls for Shas unity, promises to help the poor

Arye Deri announces that the "revolution is returning" in an elections rally in Ashdod Thursday. In his speech the Shas leader called on those who left Shas recently to return to the party. Deri promised to help the poor after the elections, saying "I Arye Makhluf Deri, promise that two months from today the sun will shine on the poor people, those invisible people, which the state chooses to ignore." (Yair Ettinger)

7:09 P.M. Meretz on Lieberman's campaign slogan: 'Transfer is the same transfer'

The Meretz party responded to the new campaign slogan announced earlier Thursday by Avigdor Liberman's Yisrael Beiteinu party, Ariel for Israel; Umm al-Fahm for Palestine."

"Whoever thought that Lieberman changed got a clear answer," Meretz said in its statement. "Transfer is the same transfer, and Lieberman is the same Lieberman."

5:41 P.M. Kahlon releases places eight through 11 on his party Kulanu's list

Moshe Kahlon has revealed four more candidates for his party's Knesset campaign ahead of its official election campaign launch Thursday night in Givat Brenner.

The candidates, filling the eighth through eleventh slots, are Eli Cohen, the VP of Israel Land Development; Roy Folkman, a former adviser to Jerusalem Mayor Nir Barkat and a graduate of the Harvard Kennedy School of Government; attorney Meirav Ben-Ari, a Tel Aviv council member; and Shai Babad, who was the CEO of the Second Authority for Television and Radio until recently.

The number two through seven slots are reserved for reserve General Yoav Galant; Tzaga Malko, a prominent member of the Ethiopian Jewish community; former Israeli ambassador to the U.S. Michael Oren; Jerusalem Deputy Mayor Rachel Azaria; former anti-poverty commission head Eli Alaluf, and educator and former Kiryat Shmona deputy mayor Dr. Yifat Sasa-Bitton. (Ilan Lior)

5:09 P.M. Lieberman reveals campaign slogan: 'Ariel for Israel; Umm al-Fahm for Palestine'

Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman on Thursday revealed his partys campaign slogan for the upcoming election. Ariel for Israel; Umm al-Fahm for Palestine."

The slogan, which refers to the large Israeli settlement in the West Bank and the biggest Arab city in Israel, essentially reiterates' Lieberman's "peace plan" envisioning the transfer of Israeli Arabs in exchange for economic incentives. For more click here.



9:45 A.M. MK Shaked sees herself as minister in next government

MK Ayelet Shaked, who appears to be the big winner of the Habaiyt Hayehudi primary election, tells Army Radio that the results are proof that the public values her political achievements. "It's very flattering. I think the party has done great things in the past two years and I'm very pleased that I'm being given a chance to continue my work."

Shaked says she expects to be appointed a minister if she in fact finishes first in the primary and her party decides to join a future coalition.

She refused to say if the party sees Naftali Bennett as a candidate for prime minister.

8:45 A.M. Ayelet Shaked leads Habayit Hayehudi primary

MK Ayelet Shaked was leading in Habayit Hayehudi's primary elections on Thursday morning, preliminary results showed with 90 percent of the voted counted.

After receiving more than 54,000 votes, Shaked will be placed third on the Knesset list after party leader and Economy Minister Naftali Bennett and Housing Minister Uri Ariel, who was placed second in a spot reserved for the Tekuma faction.

The rest of the preliminary list is as follows: Deputy Religious Affairs Minister Eli Ben Dahan, Knesset Finance Committee chairman MK Nissan Slomiansky and Pensioner Affairs Minister Uri Orbach follow on the ticket in places 4, 5 and 6.

Ronen Shoval, the founder of the right-wing activist group Im Tirzu that was described by a judge as having similarities to fascism, will be placed in the 16th spot, and, according to the latest polls, may stay out of the next Knesset. (Chaim Levinson)

The preliminary list:

1. Naftali Bennett

2. Uri Ariel (reserved for Tekuma)

3. Ayelet Shaked

4. Eli Ben Dahan

5. Nissan Slomiansky

6. Uri Orbach

7. Yinon Magal (reserved for Bennett appointee)

8. Shuli Moalem (reserved for a woman)

9. Bezalel Smotrich (reserved for Tekuma)

10. Nir Orbach (reserved for central committee member)

11. Moti Yogev

12. Yehudit Shilat (reserved for a woman)

13. Avi Wortzman

14. Avichai Rontzki

15. Orit Struck (reserved for Tekuma)

16. Ronen Shoval

17. Sarah Elias (reserved for a woman)

18. Zvulun Kalfa