An election campaign billboard shifts between images of Labor Party leader Isaac Herzog, right, and Likud Party leader and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Tel Aviv, March 3, 2015.

The elections for the 20th Knesset give the public an opportunity to change the government and bring Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahus long term to an end. This must be the voters goal next Tuesday.

Since returning to power, Netanyahu has led Israel to deepen the occupation and settlement in the West Bank, to two futile wars in Gaza and to a rift in relations with the United States and Europe, including boycott threats and sanctions from the latter.

Netanyahus economic policy caused the defense budget to swell and apartment prices to soar, ignoring the peoples distress. It has blocked every reform. He saw the Arab citizens as a nuisance, advanced anti-democratic legislation against them and abused the asylum-seekers from Africa.

Netanyahu called early elections and presented them as a referendum on his continued rule. Anyone concerned about the future and who wants to live in a peace-seeking state that is part of the international community and strives to integrate the minorities within it and narrow the social gaps, must say no to him and vote for a turnabout.

Isaac Herzog and Tzipi Livni, the leaders of the Zionist Union, are a convincing alternative to the ruling party and the prime minister. Herzog is worthy of public credit. Judging by his conduct and positions as opposition head and during the campaign, he will presumably not pursue Netanyahus intimidation and oppression policy and will act to normalize Israels foreign policy and public life.

Keep updated: Sign up to our newsletter Email * Please enter a valid email address Sign up Please wait… Thank you for signing up. We've got more newsletters we think you'll find interesting. Click here Oops. Something went wrong. Please try again later. Try again Thank you, The email address you have provided is already registered. Close

Voting for the Zionist Union will strengthen Herzogs chances of being tasked by the president to form the next government.

Anyone who wants to vote for changing the government, but prefers a party that wont under any circumstances join a government led by Netanyahu, must vote for Meretz. This is a party committed to a democratic, egalitarian Israel and has proved it with countless legislation initiatives and an impressive number of women on its slate. The danger that Meretz may not gain enough votes to make it into the Knesset and its liberal voice will be absent from parliament is another reason to support it.

The Joint List reflects the Arab minoritys struggle for equality and for strengthening the civilian element in the Israeli identity. No struggle is more just and the political union forced on the Arabs may increase their representation in the Knesset. This will be a vital contribution to Israeli democracy. But the hastily forged list is still searching for its way, as was evident from the surplus vote agreement affair with Meretz.

There is a chance to change the rightist rule and put Israel back on the track of political moderation and social integration. We must not miss this opportunity.