After sequestering himself in religious studies for the last year, Mr. Deri, 41, pronounced his political career over. But he would be eligible to run for Parliament after serving his term, and he could even become a cabinet minister again in 10 years.

''I came all the way from New York to see him off to prison,'' said Yoram Siman-tov, an Israeli immigrant who lives in Queens. ''And I will return again in a few years to welcome him out. I'm a frequent flier.''

Over the last 15 years, Mr. Deri built from scratch a political, social and religious movement that blossomed into a linchpin political party and Israel's third largest. Shas's leadership is Orthodox, but its adherents include many traditional, but not strictly religious, Jews of Middle Eastern descent who are drawn to the party's second identity as an ethnic pride movement.

Along the way, as they developed a sizable religious school system and social service program, Mr. Deri and his associates took advantage of his position as a public servant, according to the judges who convicted him last year of fraud and bribery. He appealed the conviction and lost.

The case brought to the surface ethnic, religious and class tensions. Many secular Israelis saw Mr. Deri's behavior as a threat to the rule of law by the leader of a party that answers to divine law first.

Many Shas supporters saw the legal system's behavior as an elite crusade to bring down a powerful Moroccan-born Jew. Today his supporters contrasted Mr. Deri's conviction with the state's decision not to prosecute Ezer Weizman, the former president, who accepted substantial cash gifts from a businessman.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

''Look what color can do,'' today's posters said, comparing Mr. Weizman's supposed self-imposed punishment -- retirement to his beach house in Caesarea -- with Mr. Deri's jail term. Sephardic Jews here often refer to themselves as black and to members of the Ashkenazic elite, like Mr. Weizman, as white.

At today's rally, Mr. Deri asked forgiveness from everyone whose path he had crossed in the recent past and urged his followers to ''rechannel the pain they've caused us into continuing the Jewish revolution.'' A leading rabbi, Reuven Elbaz, pronounced the day ''Bastille Day for the Sephardic community.''

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Deri faded from public life after the elections last spring, but the tensions raised by his trial did not fade. They were worsened by Shas's difficult relationship with Mr. Barak. After Shas resigned from his government, the prime minister announced a ''civil revolution'' to divest the religious parties and authorities of their entrenched power. Today, his cabinet voted to dismantle the Ministry of Religious Affairs, a longtime power base of the religious parties.

Those recent political developments fueled the anti-establishment sentiment at Mr. Deri's goodbye party today. Highlighting the increasingly bitter relationship between secular Israelis and Shas, several motorized hang-gliders zoomed back and forth over the rally with pointed messages: ''Cursed be the one who takes the bribes,'' said one banner, citing a verse from the Bible.

''This is the civil revolution of Ehud Barak,'' said Mordechai Ohayon, 25, pointing skyward. ''He will create a government of the secular elite that holds its cabinet meetings on Sheinkin Street in Tel Aviv, with pork chops for all his ministers.'' Sheinkin street is considered the epicenter of secular Israel.

Most mainstream Israeli newspapers denounced ''Prison Day'' for furthering a cult of persecution around Mr. Deri. ''Felon, not martyr,'' said a Jerusalem Post editorial. ''It behooves the Sephardi party's leaders to understand that the facile canonization of a criminal is, in essence, an insufferable attack on the rule of law.''

The mood today was both frantic and festive, as thousands of Orthodox men and women -- segregated by sex -- prayed, sang and danced under the broiling summer sun.

Mr. Deri arrived at the rally -- and at prison -- more than an hour late.

Traffic from Jerusalem to this city outside Tel Aviv was tied up by the convoy that accompanied him, by police roadblocks and by some Shas roadblocks with burning tires. Hostility toward the police, and toward journalists, was high, and rabbis kept reminding the crowd that ''they are Jews, too.'' Several journalists were pelted with stones, and a few were wounded. The police used horses to disperse the crowd.

''If we were a different party, the prison would be in flames,'' Rabbi Elbaz said, praising the crowd's restraint. ''But we're going to show them all what courtesy really means.''