Yesh Atid’s emerging slate ahead of the election offers few changes from the old, with the notable exception of the addition of Haim Yellin, mayor of the rocket-battered Eshkol Regional Council near Gaza, in the relatively high seventh slot.

The list, which was published by the NRG news site Sunday, reflects party leader Yair Lapid’s desire to hold on to his now-experienced policy team – and his campaign promise to continue the policies pursued by his party in the last government.

After Lapid at number one, the next four slots on the list are taken by Yesh Atid’s ex-cabinet ministers: former education minister Shai Piron, former health minister Yael German, former welfare minister Meir Cohen and former science minister Yaakov Peri. They are followed by Ofer Shelah, the party’s Knesset faction chair and a close Lapid confidant, at slot six.

Get The Times of Israel's Daily Edition by email and never miss our top stories Free Sign Up

Following Yellin at seven, Lapid placed the party’s most senior committee chair in the outgoing Knesset, MK Yoel Razvozov, who headed the Immigration, Absorption and Diaspora Committee.

Only after Razvozov does the list begin to register changes from the last Knesset. Three MKs have quit: Adi Kol (who chaired the Knesset State Control Committee), Shimon Solomon and Rina Frenkel.

In an election with much talk about the presence of women on party lists, it is significant that two women are placed in the ninth and tenth places: Karin Elharar and Aliza Lavie, with Elharar rising one slot and Lavie dropping three. Without the two women at 9 and 10, there would be just one woman, Yael German, among the top 10 slots. (It is worth recalling that Likud came under withering criticism earlier this month for electing just one woman, Miri Regev, to one of its top 10 spots.)

Mickey Levy, a former Jerusalem police chief who served as deputy finance minister in the last government, is at number 11. Lapid’s second major “draft pick,” former IDF major general and ex-Hatnua MK Elazar Stern, rounds out the 12 slots considered realistic for the party based on recent polls.

Slot 13 went to MK Pnina Tamano-Shata, one higher than last time but possibly not enough for her to make it back into the Knesset.

Dov Lipman, the Knesset’s only serving US-born member, is listed inexplicably as “not final” in the 14th slot on the list leaked to NRG. Lipman has campaigned vigorously for Lapid in the English-speaking community, and, alongside Kulanu’s Michael Oren, is one of two viable native Anglophone candidates for the current Knesset, at least based on the Knesset slates publicized thus far.

The leaked list ends at number 15 with MK Ruth Calderon.