Date posted: 10/01/2003* The Battle of Debecka Pass Iraq







Northern Iraq - Special Forces are tasked with securing a key intersection near the town of Debecka located in northern Iraq between the cities of Irbil to the north and Kirkuk to the south. 0001Z - Ridgeline between friendly force and objective Rock (crossroads) bombed by American B-52s. 0200Z - Special Forces A-Teams linkup with Kurdish Peshmerga. 0230Z - Joint force begins forward movement and linkup with Special Forces reconnaissance elements sent forward prior to the B-52 strikes. On the Road - Special Forces and Kurdish Peshmerga forces speed toward their objective. 0300Z - Joint force reaches the base of the ridgeline, where Peshmerga engineers clear a path through a minefield on the main road. 0315Z - Joint force encounters a large dirt berm obstacle. Special Forces engineers attempt to breach. 0330Z - Iraqi forces engage Peshmerga soldiers with small arms and 106mm recoilless rifle fire. 0331Z - Attempt to breech obstacle aborted, as joint force bypass the obstacle and go over the top of the ridgeline. 0400Z - Special Forces A-Team engages dismounted Iraqis in bunkers. 0415Z - Objective Rock reached. About 20 Iraqi soldiers surrender, including an Iraqi Major, who relates that an Iraqi armor unit withdrew to the south after the bombing, leaving him and his men behind. 0430Z - Joint force prepares to secure and hold the objective. A terrain analysis determines there is not sufficient early warning time to prepare a defense if attacked from the south. A small ridge - later known as Press Hill - obscures a high-speed avenue of approach from the south and Special Forces move forward to see over the hill. 0431Z - One Special Forces A-Team returns to the dirt berm obstacle that was bypassed to destroy it in the event friendly forces must withdraw from the area. 0445Z - The dirt berm obstacle is breeched using a combination of explosives carried by the Special Forces augmented with enemy antitank mines collected from a nearby minefield. 0445Z - Special Forces crest Press Hill and see Iraqi vehicles approaching. An attempt to engage the Iraqi vehicles with a .50 caliber machine gun is ineffective against the fast moving trucks. 0500Z - The A-Teams move forward to engage the enemy from a positio designated the "Alamo" - approximately 900 meters from the objective. 0505Z - An Iraqi light vehicle is hit and runs off the road. 0510Z - A Special Forces weapons sergeant requests and receives permission to engage an Iraqi truck with a Javelin. The Javelin missile strikes the truck at a range of 3,000 meters. 0515Z - After engaging two more vehicles with limited success, Special Forces move forward and occupy the road intersection. 0531Z - Several Iraqi vehicles approach at slow speed from the south, obscured by limited visibility. 0533Z - The A-Teams receive mortar fire. U.S. Air Force controllers, traveling with the Special Forces, identify two mortar tubes to the east near the town of Debecka. One A-Team moves to destroy the mortars. 0540Z - A Special Forces soldier sights armored personnel carriers and tanks emerging from the haze and quickly alerts friendly forces by radio. The Iraqi T-55 tanks pass through the line of armored personnel carriers and open fire with their 100mm main guns. Special Forces soldiers dismount their vehicle and attempt to engage the approaching armor, as the remaining soldiers hold their position. Because the Javelin CLU has not warmed up, the soldiers withdraw to the Alamo ridgeline. From their new position the Special Forces soldiers engage the approaching Iraqi armored forces with Javelin, .50 caliber machine guns and Mark 19 40mm grenade launchers. 0552Z - The first close air support aircraft arrive. Two U.S. Navy F-14 Tomcats report in with 750 pound bombs. Cat On the Prowl - A U.S. Navy F-14 Tomcat arrives on the scene to provide close air support. 0554Z - U.S. Air Force air controllers direct the aircraft onto the intersection containing the Iraqi vehicles. On Target - A U.S. Navy F-14 Tomcat drops Paveway II bombs as directed by U.S. Air Force controllers. 0554Z - Airburst shells begin to explode 300 meters in front of the Special Forces position. After the battle, Special Forces discovered an abandoned ZSU 57-2 self-propelled antiaircraft gun believed to be the source of the airburst shells. Abandoned Artillery - Special Forces soldiers inspect an abandoned ZSU 57-2 self-propelled antiaircraft gun after the battle is over. 0600Z - The A-Teams receive 152mm high-explosive artillery rounds from the enemy. The last round - a smoke round - nearly hits the teams. Concerned that the enemy artillery has accurately bracketed their position, the A-Teams are forced to withdrawal to Press Hill. 0715Z - Special Forces cease fire when approximately 12 unarmed Iraqi soldiers, waiving white flags attempting to surrender. As other Iraqi soldiers attempt to join in the surrender, two white trucks pull up. Six Iraqi men dressed in white robes exit the white trucks and begin shooting the surrendering Iraqi soldiers. An Air Force controller calls for an air strike on the white trucks, which are destroyed. Clean Sweep - An air strike destroys the white Iraqi trucks in the intersection. 0720Z - Special Forces modified re-supply vehicles arrive with Javelin missiles and ammunition. Previous to the re-supply, the A-Teams had only three Javelin missiles left. The earlier decision to remove the breach proved critical to the timely re-supply of the teams. For two hours enemy forces are bombed. Remaining Iraqi soldiers flee the battlefield on foot, abandoning all their vehicles. For the next two days Iraqi artillery and multiple rocket launcers continued to fire upon the Special Forces positions. *The content on this page is classified as historical content. See this important information regarding such content.