A British soldier killed by insurgents in Iraq was still alive as he lay surrounded by a crowd almost four hours after his convoy was ambushed, an inquest was told yesterday.

Sapper Luke Allsopp, 24, was filmed by his attackers and the footage was later shown on al-Jazeera television. He was seen collapsed on the ground, apparently lifeless, but forensic experts who examined the footage believe he was still alive.

The film, shown on British television, caused outrage. The Prime Minister described the killings of Sapper Allsopp and Staff Sgt Simon Cullingworth, 36, both bomb disposal experts with 33 Engineer Regiment, as an "execution".

The family of Sapper Allsopp said they had been told the men died in combat.

An inquest into their deaths, at Oxford coroner's court, heard that the pair were travelling in a Land Rover and may have taken a wrong turning into the town of Al Zubayr, near Basra, in southern Iraq in March 2003. The town was considered "too risky" for British troops to enter.

The vehicle was first hit by a hail of bullets and then a rocket-propelled grenade.

Lance Corporal Marcus Clarke, who was driving in another Land Rover behind, told Andrew Walker, the Oxford assistant deputy coroner, that he heard Sgt Cullingworth shouting over the radio "keep up, keep up".

L/Cpl Clarke, who was hit in the shoulder during the attack, said: "The road then disappeared in a cloud of smoke. We drove into smoke and I was then facing the front of their Land Rover. They were going up the road backwards, off to the right.

"I thought I was going to hit them and swerved around. We continued and got 15 metres past the first vehicle when we were also hit by RPGs, which spun us round and we crashed."

He said that as their attackers, clad in black and shooting with rifles, began to run towards them, they abandoned their vehicles and took cover in a compound.

They could hear Sgt Cullingworth calling two to three minutes after the ambush started, saying: "Clarkie, come back and get me."

Pathologists who examined the bodies, which were found almost a month later in shallow graves near the town, told the coroner that both had died from gunshot wounds, from at least two different rifles and a pistol.

Dr Nicholas Hunt said the footage showed that Sapper Allsopp was still breathing "although apparently close to death" in Al Zubayr.

He said he had sustained a gunshot wound in the heart that would have rendered him unconscious and killed him "relatively rapidly", but it was not possible to say if this was sustained before or after the film was taken.

Captain Michael Eastough, responsible for giving the group their orders for the day, said he sent them to clear a radio station to the south of Al Zubayr.

He said they had been warned not to enter the town, recognised as a "risky area" but ringed by coalition forces.

The coroner said: "It's difficult to understand how this convoy made its way into an area which was highly risky without encountering any British troops to tell them 'You can't go into this area'."

Capt Eastough responded: "I can't answer that. I was given the task of showing the road and that's what I did."

According to L/Cpl Philip John Law, travelling with L/Cpl Clarke, the only map the group were issued with was the one held by Sgt Cullingworth and he believed a wrong turning took them into the town.

But Capt Eastough said each vehicle should have had a map to "second check" the lead vehicle.

Staff Sgt Cullingworth, from Essex, who had previously served in the Balkans and Afghanistan, left a wife and two boys, aged eight and three.

Sapper Allsopp, from north London, had previously served with bomb disposal in Cyprus and Kenya.

The inquest was adjourned until Monday.

Publishers wishing to reproduce photographs on this page should phone 44 (0) 207 538 7505 or e-mail syndication@telegraph.co.uk