IRAQIS BASH CHOPPERS One U.S. copter downed, crew captured by Saddam's guards

A formidable fleet of U.S. Apache Longbow assault helicopters was transformed from hunters to prey yesterday by a savage barrage of anti-aircraft fire.

One of the choppers was downed by the withering groundfire and its crew captured by Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard.

The formation of 32 assault helicopters was operating near Karbala, about 50 miles southwest of Baghdad, when it was caught in the maelstrom of groundfire that left the pilots who escaped "somewhat stunned" by the fierce resistance.

"It was all they could do to defend themselves," said CNN correspondent Karl Penhaul, an embedded reporter. "They were unable to achieve many of their objectives. . . . They had to return fire and get out of the situation."

"Most of the time they spent in that battle zone, they were defending themselves and trying to get out alive," he said.

One pilot said he encountered a "hornet's nest, a barrage of anti-aircraft fire," while another said he had one of his engines knocked out by a rocket-propelled grenade. The aircraft dropped 15 to 20 feet, but he was able to regain control and return to Kuwait on its remaining engine, the second pilot said.

Iraqi television broadcast pictures of the captive pilots and their downed Apache AH-64D helicopter sitting intact on a grassy field as men with Kalashnikov rifles danced around it.

The TV correspondent stood beside a white-bearded smiling farmer brandishing a rifle he said he used to knock the $43 million chopper from the skies.

"It was shot down by the rifle of a heroic farmer from Karbala, Ali Obeid Mingash, from the Hindiyah tribes. He is a brave fighter, he is one of the sons of great Iraq," the report said.

'Uncertain' fate

Gen. Tommy Franks, the U.S. war commander, confirmed a helicopter was missing but denied a farmer shot it down.

"We have a two-man crew missing right now," he said, adding that their fate is "uncertain."

Another Apache and a UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter tried to rescue the crew, but were driven off by groundfire, an official said on condition of anonymity.

Pilots were "somewhat dazed, somewhat stunned" by the level of groundfire, Penhaul said.

The Medina Division that the Apaches were stalking is one of the best and most powerful of the Republican Guard divisions, said Maj. Gen. Stanley McChrystal, a Pentagon spokesman.

The unit is heavily dug in and spread out, which is why helicopters were used against it instead of cruise missiles, McChrystal said. The Apache "gives them the opportunity to go in and almost search around an area to conduct destruction."

The downed chopper is from the 1st Battalion of the 227th Aviation Regiment, based in Fort Hood, Tex., the Army said.

Iraq also claimed a second helicopter was shot down, which an embedded correspondent with The New York Times also reported. The Times report said that the crew was rescued. But Franks disputed that.

"All the other helicopters involved in the mission did accomplish the mission and returned safely to base," Franks said.

.GRAPHIC

.AH-64D Apache Longbow

. The Army's main attack helicopter is significantly more lethal than the Apache that was a hero of the 1991 Gulf War. Improvements include advanced radar, improved night vision and Hellfire missiles. Weaponry: 30-mm. chain gun, rocket launchers

Crew: 2 Height: 14 feet

Length: 58 feet with rotors

Max speed: 180 mph

Endurance: 3 hours

Cost: $43 million

.Hellfire missile

Range: About 5 miles

Number on board: Up to 16

.GRAPHIC

.ATACMS Army Tactical Missile Sytem

. ATACMS Block I Nickname: Attack 'Ems

Rocket launcher system designed to hit enemy forces well behind the front line. Can fire off six powerful missiles filled with 930 baseball-size bomblets that are dispersed in midair. The bomblets spew shrapnel at everything across eight acres.

Range: 100 miles

Missile length: 13 feet

Weight: 3,270 pounds

Warhead: 930 bomblets.

Each 1.3-pound grenade is lethal to anyone within about 50 feet.

Cost: $250,000 a missile

ATACMS Block II

Second version of the missile is used against moving armored vehicles. Once over designated area, warhead releases 13 submunitions that sprout wings and a parachute. Each submunition floats down until it locks onto the heat and noise of a tank engine. It then discards the parachute, glides to its destination and explodes.

Range: 85 miles

Missile length: 13 feet

Weight: 3,270 pounds

Warhead: 13 Brilliant Anti-Armor

Technology (BAT) glider submunitions

Cost: $1.46 million