General Eric Shinseki, who was army chief of staff before the invasion, had said that several hundred thousand soldiers would be needed to secure Iraq. But senior U.S. officials, including Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, were dismissive, even mocking, of the general's argument. Shinseki's career subsequently languished and he retired.

Some critics saw that as an example of attempts by the Pentagon leadership under Rumsfeld to throttle criticism of planning for the war from the military establishment.

"Shinseki was right," Abizaid said Wednesday.

President George W. Bush said on Nov. 8, the day after the elections, that Rumsfeld would be stepping down, in what was seen as a bow to mounting public concern about the war. But the president has always said that the military commanders in the field were given the forces they requested.

Democratic senators, who will assume control of Congress in January because of the party's victories last week, pressed Abizaid for what Senator Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts called "a dramatic change in policy." Some Democrats say the election amounted to a call for an exit plan from Iraq.

Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, who will become the chairman of the Armed Services Committee in January, urged phased troop withdrawals in the coming months, but not the hard deadline for a pullout that some in his party favor.

"There is a limit of the blood and treasure that Americans are willing to spend," he said.

Abizaid told the committee that although military planners needed flexibility in Iraq, "force caps and specific timetables limit that flexibility."

Although Abizaid had warned recently that the country could slip into civil war if sectarian violence continued, he said Wednesday that a recent visit to Iraq had left him more optimistic: The government was growing more confident, he asserted, and Iraqi security forces more autonomous. Violence was down from recent peaks, although still "dangerously high."

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, he added, "I wouldn't say that we have turned the corner." The Iraqis need to do far more to strengthen their own government, economy and security forces, he said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The administration has expressed increasing openness to alternative thinking on Iraq, even while insisting that a hasty departure could be deeply destructive. Abizaid's comments were thus especially anticipated.

Abizaid is part of a Pentagon group examining Iraq policy, even as an independent study group on Iraq headed by former Secretary of State James Baker and a former House Democrat, Lee Hamilton, is winding up its own work.

The White House this week began pulling together the Pentagon findings and those of other Iraq policy reviews, by the State Department and other agencies, The Washington Post reported.

Officials say this work has nothing to do with the Baker-Hamilton report, but they acknowledge wanting to complete it before that report is due, around mid- December. That might make it easier for the administration to resist political pressure to accept, wholesale, the outside recommendations.

Democrats have portrayed the Nov. 7 election as a referendum in favor of an expedited withdrawal from Iraq. Suggestions of a move in the other direction, going against the political currents by temporarily sending thousands more troops, have been pressed by some retired generals and at least one Republican member of the Senate committee, John McCain of Arizona. They say it is vital to gain control of the country before leaving.

McCain tried Wednesday to get Abizaid to endorse that approach, and he appeared frustrated when Abizaid would not.

The general said that a much greater effort to prepare Iraqi troops was needed, embedding more of the American troops already there with Iraqi units, and doing more to support Iraqi- led efforts to disarm sectarian militias.

"It's not that we're absolutely not considering force increases - we will," Abizaid said. "We want the Iraqis to do more. It's easy for the Iraqis to rely upon us to do this war."

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Levin told Abizaid he favored a phased withdrawal starting in four to six months. "Iraqis have to take responsibility for their own future," Levin said. Unlike some Democrats, he has not spoken of a deadline for final withdrawal.

Abizaid said that even under the best circumstances, quickly moving 140,000 combat troops would be difficult. "It is a considerable endeavor," he said. "It is an extremely complex and difficult operation."

But Levin insisted that drastic changes were needed to shake Iraqis into accepting responsibility for their country's future. "You have a civil war right now going on," he said. "What we're doing now is not working."