Home > War on Iraq > Article Monday March 24, 2003

national world opinion business technology sport entertainment multimedia classifieds

jobs

property

cars

place an ad



extra

personal finance

travel

education



subscribe

home delivery

eNewsletter



archives



today's edition: am

past 10 days



site guide





Decapitation attempt was worth a try, George March 22 2003



The flexibility of Washington's war plans was tested by making Saddam Hussein the first target, writes Marian Wilkinson. The United States Defence Secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, slapped down the reporters who insisted that President George Bush had not followed the "war plan" they had all written about for weeks. It was supposed to start with a 48-hour "shock and awe" bombing raid that would stun the Iraqi generals into surrendering - or at least prompt some to defect and save their skins. But that had not happened. "I don't believe you have the war plan," Rumsfeld chided them at his first briefing since the attacks on Baghdad, "a fact that does not make me unhappy." But the questions persisted over whether Bush had made a hasty decision to test the flexibility of the war plan hours before his deadline passed for Saddam Hussein to leave Baghdad. He was swayed by his civilian inner circle - including the Vice-President, Dick Cheney, the CIA director, George Tenet, and Rumsfeld - to launch an early short, sharp military strike to "decapitate" the Iraqi leadership. The strike launched the war hours, if not a whole day, before it was expected.

");document.write(" advertisement

Rumsfeld insists the decision was based on "very good intelligence" about the presence of key Iraqi figures at a leadership compound in Baghdad. Bush was briefed on the intelligence late on Wednesday afternoon in Washington. He approved the precipitous strike soon after, beginning the war.

US military reports claimed one of Saddam Hussein's houses was hit by the 40 cruise missiles and bombs that were dropped in the strike. Fourteen hours later, while Rumsfeld said the Pentagon was still assessing the impact of the strike, the International Red Cross in Geneva reported that information gathered from Baghdad hospitals revealed the strike had also killed one civilian and wounded 14 people, including nine women and a child.

The accuracy of the intelligence from the CIA and the National Security Agency that triggered the strike may soon be assessed independently. But soon after the attacks, Saddam appeared on Iraqi state television. Although the White House encouraged speculation that it was his "body double", there was nothing to indicate he had been injured.

Rumsfeld was unapologetic. Targeting Saddam and his senior leadership for assassination in the first strike of the war was exactly the kind of military thinking that Rumsfeld espouses. It is "transitional warfare" over "traditional warfare". The plan has to be flexible.

"One has to take account of the realities that you find in the world," he said. "And to not do that would be a terrible mistake."

The head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Richard Myers, backed him up. "Having intel agencies and armed forces that are flexible is key to victory and that's what you saw," he said.

Yet Rumsfeld has a history of clashing with his military over just how flexible they are supposed to be.

As images flooded in of US forces in the Gulf suddenly on the move, it looked as though many were scrambling to catch up with the President's decision. The flexibility of the war plan was more apparent in Washington than it was in Kuwait.

There is no doubt that if the strike on the leadership has shaken the regime without a brutal "shock and awe" bombing raid, Bush will be applauded. The strike appeared to be as much a psychological operation as a military one.

This had been the hallmark of the campaign long before the war even began. Iraqi forces have been barraged with leaflets and radio broadcasts exhorting them not to fight for Saddam. Reporters are repeatedly told Iraqi soldiers will surrender in large numbers, that Saddam's generals will turn on him and the Iraqi people will rise up. Indeed, Rumsfeld spent a good part of his first war briefing issuing orders to the Iraqi military and civilians, telling them what to do to assist the US forces.

But like Saddam, Rumsfeld and Bush are also facing their moment of truth.

Will the US and its allies be welcomed into Iraq as liberators as waves of Iraqi soldiers surrender and the inner circle defects? Or will they face a siege in Baghdad where the soldiers and civilians on the ground once again experience the brutal realities of war?

With the US-led forces moving in for a full-scale attack, many Americans are hoping Rumsfeld and Bush have got it right.

Printer friendly version Email to a friend