Washington Post Staff Writer

Monday, April 7, 2003; Page A01

In a surprise move, the United States has begun airlifting hundreds of members of an Iraqi exile group into southern Iraq, vanguard elements of what a high-ranking Pentagon officer said would form the basis of a new Iraqi army.

Taking up camp on the outskirts of Nasiriyah, the soldiers belong to the Iraqi National Congress and are being led by Ahmed Chalabi, a London-based former banker and principal founder of the INC. Chalabi was among those flown to the southern Iraqi city from Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq.





The lightly armed force is prepared to perform a variety of missions, from delivering humanitarian aid to hunting down supporters of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, INC spokesmen said. But U.S. Marine Gen. Peter Pace, vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, suggested the group's significance may be as much political as military. "These are Iraqi citizens who want to fight for a free Iraq, who will become basically the core of the new Iraqi army once Iraq is free," he said on ABC's "This Week."

A senior Pentagon official said the decision to send the force had been made within the last few days and reflected a desire to enlist more native Iraqis in "working the cities," where most U.S. forces have at best received a tepid welcome from the local population. Some of the force will be deployed to other southern cities, the official said, while another group will assist U.S. forces in northern Iraq. A large number of those sent south are Shiites who had been Iraqi soldiers and had taken refuge in the north over the past decade, the official said.

The group's sudden move to southern Iraq, and the role played by the Pentagon in facilitating it, is likely to prompt controversy, fanning suspicions that senior U.S. defense officials are trying to give Chalabi a favored place in the formation of a new Iraqi government. The INC is one of six anti-Hussein organizations -- including groups representing northern Iraqi Kurds and southern Iraqi Shiites -- that have formed an uneasy coalition under U.S. auspices.

Chalabi, 58, is a polarizing figure in Washington and among Iraqi exiles. His supporters, centered in the Pentagon and Vice President Cheney's office, credit him with vision and formidable political skills that helped Bush administration hawks press their case for toppling Hussein. But to others, particularly in the State Department and CIA, Chalabi is an unreliable partner with only a limited base of support in Iraq after 45 years spent living outside the country.

The insertion of INC forces is likely to boost Chalabi's hopes of becoming the leading expatriate voice -- and perhaps the strongest Iraqi voice -- in a postwar "interim authority" envisioned by the administration, although senior U.S. officials have insisted they are not trying to elevate one figure over another. Chalabi has pressed U.S. officials to create a free Iraqi military force that could challenge Hussein, a notion that U.S. analysts inside and outside government have considered politically unwise and militarily doomed.

The airlift began Friday with U.S. military aircraft ferrying Chalabi and the INC soldiers from northern Iraq to Tallil airfield in southern Iraq. By today, the number is due to reach 700, according to Zaab Sethna, an INC spokesman with the group. An INC news release on the deployment said the contingent has been designated the 1st Battalion of Free Iraqi Forces.

Sethna said the group is working with a U.S. Special Forces unit and living in tents and buildings on the edge of Nasiriyah, a city 175 miles southeast of Baghdad that was the scene of fierce fighting between U.S. Marines and Iraqi forces a week ago. In one of their first actions, Sethna said, members of the group met yesterday with several "tribal leaders" in the area.

"The tribal leaders were happy to see Iraqis serving with U.S. troops," Sethna said by satellite phone.

Asked what missions the INC force expected to undertake, Sethna mentioned distributing humanitarian supplies, protecting U.S. military supply lines, maintaining law and order, and rooting out paramilitary fighters from Saddam's Fedayeen and the Baath Party.

"We'll go wherever Gen. Franks orders us to go," he said, referring to Gen. Tommy R. Franks, head of U.S. Central Command, which is running the war.

The INC group's unexpected arrival in southern Iraq followed a Pentagon announcement last week that a program based in Hungary to train Iraqi expatriates as guides, translators and security officers had been suspended. Fewer than 100 candidates completed the course, defense officials said, despite a goal of at least 1,000.