Washington Post Staff Writer

Friday, April 4, 2003; Page A10

Republicans jumped on Sen. John F. Kerry (D-Mass.) yesterday in the wake of reports that the Democratic presidential candidate had told a New Hampshire audience that "we need a regime change in the United States."

Kerry, who supported the resolution authorizing President Bush to go to war against Iraq but was sharply critical of the way Bush handled the diplomacy before the war, had largely refrained from criticism since U.S. troops launched their operations March 19. But according to newspaper accounts, the Massachusetts senator delivered a stinging rebuke Wednesday during a campaign trip.

Kerry said that, after talking to foreign diplomats and world leaders recently, he had concluded that "it will take a new president" to repair the damage Bush has done because other leaders are not "going to trust this president, no matter what."

"What we need now is not just a regime change in Saddam Hussein and Iraq, but we need a regime change in the United States," Kerry said.

House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert (R-Ill.) and House Majority Leader Tom DeLay (R-Tex.) led the chorus of GOP critics who attacked Kerry for challenging Bush during wartime. "Senator Kerry's remark, equating regime change in Iraq with regime change in the United States, is not what we need at this time," Hastert said. "What we need is for this nation to pull together, to support our troops and to support our commander in chief."

Democrats pointed out that during the Kosovo air campaign, both Hastert and DeLay criticized President Bill Clinton. DeLay was quoted in an interview with The Washington Post as saying, "We have a president I don't trust, who has proven my reason for not trusting him: He had no plan. We have a civil war that was falsely described as a huge humanitarian problem, when in comparison to other places, it was nothing."

Kerry spokesman Robert Gibbs responded to GOP criticism by saying: "Clearly, Senator Kerry intended no disrespect or lack of support for our commander in chief during wartime, but the point of this campaign is, obviously, to change the administration of this government. And unlike many of his Republican critics, Senator Kerry has worn the uniform, served his country, seen combat, so he'd just as soon skip their lectures about supporting our troops."

Gephardt's Funds Rank Third



Rep. Richard A. Gephardt (D-Mo.) reported yesterday that he raised $3.6 million for his presidential campaign during the first three months of the year, putting him in third place among candidates who have issued statements about their first-quarter fundraising.

Although Gephardt built a national fundraising network during his years as House Democratic leader, he raised significantly less money for his presidential campaign than Sen. John Edwards (D-N.C.) and Sen. John F. Kerry (D-Mass.). Edwards led the Democratic pack with $7.4 million, with Kerry at $7 million.

Gephardt's report left him slightly ahead of Sen. Joseph I. Lieberman (D-Conn.), who raised $3 million, but some Democrats said yesterday they were surprised that Gephardt raised just $1 million more than former Vermont governor Howard Dean, whose lack of a fundraising base has been considered a potential problem for his candidacy.