International lawyers and anti-war campaigners have reacted with astonishment after the influential Pentagon hawk Richard Perle said that the invasion of Iraq had been illegal.

In a startling break with the official White House and Downing Street lines, Mr Perle said in London on Wednesday: "I think in this case international law stood in the way of doing the right thing."

President George Bush has consistently argued that the war was legal either because of existing UN security council resolutions on Iraq - also the British Government's stated view - or as an act of self-defence permitted by international law.

But Mr Perle, a member of the defence policy board, which advises US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, said that "international law . . . would have required us to leave Saddam Hussein alone", and this would have been morally unacceptable.

French intransigence, he added, meant there had been "no practical mechanism consistent with the rules of the UN for dealing with Saddam".

Lawyer Rabinder Singh, who represented the UK Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, said the British Government "has never advanced the suggestion that it is entitled to act, or right to act, contrary to international law in relation to Iraq".

He said Mr Perle's views underlined "a divergence of view between the British Government and some senior voices in American public life [who] have expressed the view that, well, if it's the case that international law doesn't permit unilateral pre-emptive action without the authority of the UN, then the defect is in international law".

The White House has maintained that the invasion was justified under the UN charter, which guarantees the right of each state to self-defence, including pre-emptive self-defence.

UN Secretary General Kofi Annan disputed that argument.

Columbia University law professor Michael Dorf, who said the war was illegal, said: "I think Perle's statement has the virtue of honesty . . . a majority of the American public would have supported the invasion almost exactly to the same degree that they in fact did, had the Administration said that all along."

A Pentagon spokesman said yesterday that Mr Perle was not on the defence department staff, but was a member of an unpaid advisory board.

Mr Perle refused to elaborate on his remarks.

- Guardian