''The timing on why he was charged had absolutely nothing to do with politics,'' said a federal law enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''We're not trying to silence him.''

In the weeks before the war began in March, Mr. Hage, who holds both United States and Lebanese citizenship, was drawn into an effort by top Iraqi intelligence officials to open a secret communications channel with the Bush administration.

The Iraqi officials met with Mr. Hage in Beirut and Baghdad and told him they wanted Washington to know that Iraq no longer had any weapons of mass destruction. They said they were willing to make concessions in order to avoid war, Mr. Hage said.

Mr. Hage then met in early March in London with Richard Perle, the influential Pentagon adviser, to pass on the Iraqi messages and Baghdad's interest in meeting with Mr. Perle or someone else close to the Pentagon. Mr. Perle said that he passed the message to officials at the Central Intelligence Agency, but that he was told there was no interest in pursuing the contacts.

After the meetings were disclosed in November, critics of the administration said Washington's refusal to pursue the Iraqi overture indicated that the White House was determined to go to war even if Iraq did offer concessions.

On Nov. 6, just as White House officials were fielding questions about the contacts and Mr. Hage was granting television interviews in Beirut, he received a call from a Homeland Security agent informing him that there was a warrant for his arrest stemming from an incident on Jan. 28 at Dulles International Airport, outside Washington.

That day, Mr. Hage was on his way to Beirut when a search of his luggage found a semiautomatic handgun wrapped in tin foil and four stun guns and magazine clips, law enforcement officials said. He was detained and questioned at the airport, but was not arrested, and was allowed to travel home to Lebanon.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The Justice Department prosecutor on duty decided there was not enough evidence to charge Mr. Hage then with violating arms-export laws, officials said, but an investigation was begun. Four months later, in a sealed complaint brought in Alexandria, Va., federal prosecutors charged Mr. Hage with the lesser charge of delivering a firearm without notice to an airline.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

''In the post-9/11 era,'' the federal law enforcement official said, ''it's just not normal for someone to get on a plane with four stun guns.''

Passengers are required to notify airlines in advance if they wish to transport firearms and to get approval once safety concerns are addressed.

Officials with the United States Attorney's office in Alexandria declined to discuss the case.

Mr. Hage and his lawyer both said he was taking the weapons for his bodyguards in Beirut, where he has started a political career. In September, while he was campaigning near Beirut for a seat in Parliament, Mr. Hage and a group of his supporters were shot at by gunmen, he said.

The lawyer, Mr. Abady, said that the handgun was unloaded, and that the magazine clips did not contain ammunition. He also said the stun guns did not have their batteries with them and so were inoperable.

Mr. Abady added that he believed Mr. Hage did not violate the law because the guns he was transporting could not be fired.

Mr. Hage, who is now in Beirut, said Wednesday that he could not understand why the gun incident at Dulles had re-emerged as an issue. He was never told by American officials that a warrant had been issued in the case until his role in the Iraqi contacts was disclosed, he said.

''I'm caught in a situation I don't want to be in,'' Mr. Hage said. ''The incident was blown out of proportion. I think I'm caught between various people with different agendas. It was not my intent to undermine anybody or cause embarrassment. I was focused on conveying information to whoever wanted to listen.''

A law enforcement official said an agent handling the case called Mr. Hage after the article appeared in The Times to try to persuade him to return to the United States. Until that time, the fact that Mr. Hage was wanted on the charge had been secret, and the call was seen as a ''last-ditch attempt'' to persuade him to return, the official said.

The decision to make the call was made by the agent, with no political pressure or request from the White House or the Justice Department, the law enforcement official said.