March 24 2003, 4:49 AM



The five captured US soldiers - with their faces blurred - being interviewed by Iraqi TV. Photos: AFP/Al-Jazeera

Iraqi television on Sunday showed gruesome images of captured and dead American soldiers as senior US defence officials confirmed that a number of troops had been killed and about 12 were missing in southern Iraq. US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld conceded: "We believe there are some American soldiers missing."

The pictures, relayed by Qatar-based Al-Jazeera television, showed several dead bodies, apparently US soldiers killed in Iraq, along with five prisoners, including two wounded.

At least five charred and bloodied bodies lay sprawled in a makeshift morgue though it was not possible to count their exact number.

Two of the prisoners shown by Iraqi TV said they were from the 507th Maintenance Company.

The 507th Corps Support Group provides supplies, equipment, repairs and maintenance and would usually provide support as far forward as possible to the 82nd Airborne Division, the 3rd Infantry Division and the 101st Airborne Division.

US officers said Marines battling Iraqi guerrillas for Nassiriya, on the Euphrates river about 375km south-east of Baghdad, had taken "significant" casualties in a fight to open a route north to the Iraqi capital.

Lieutenant-General John Abizaid, the deputy commander of the Central Command (Centcom), told a briefing other US troops were wounded and 12 missing after a separate ambush near Nasiriyah.

Brigadier-General Vince Brooks told reporters at the Centcom forward command post here the 12 were believed to be in Iraqi custody.

The BBC quoted US sources as reporting four American dead and 50 wounded in the battle it said pitted 5000 Marines against some 500 Iraqi defenders for the main route through Nasiriyah.

The second prisoner shown, who gave his name as Joseph Hudson, said he came from El Paso, Texas.

Asked why he had come to Iraq, he said: "I follow orders".

He was asked repeatedly whether he was greeted by guns or flowers by Iraqis, but appeared not to understand the question.

A third man, who appeared to have a broken arm, was lying on a red patterned rug, but was pulled into a sitting position to answer questions. He gave his name as Edgar from Texas and said only that he had entered Iraq from Kuwait.

A fourth prisoner gave his name as Sergeant James Riley from New Jersey and said he was 31 years old. He appeared to be in shock, turning his head from side to side.

The fifth, an African American woman who gave her name as Shawna and said she was 30, had a bandaged ankle.

The bodies were wearing bloodstained camouflage uniforms and some appeared to have bullet wounds to the head.

US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld conceded: "We believe there are some American soldiers missing."

He added that showing such images would violate the Geneva Convention and called it "part of Iraqi propaganda".

General Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, put the number of missing troops at "less than 10" and said searches were underway.

CNN later reported the Pentagon had confirmed that some of the soldiers reported missing had been taken prisoner.

CNN also reported that Iraqi forces in south-central Iraq have herded women and children into army positions to forestall coalition airstrikes.

A correspondent embedded with the US 7th Cavalry said US military officials had told him an airstrike had been called off when the human shields were spotted.

The Iraqi commander was negotiating a surrender, according to correspondent Tom Mintner.

As night fell in Baghdad, reporters saw a missile hit an unidentified target on the east bank of the Tigris River, sparking a fireball, as the Iraqi capital came under bombardment for the fourth night of the war aimed at overthrowing President Saddam Hussein.

US-led troops were engaged in a fierce battle for control of Nasiriyah - a key crossing point over the Euphrates river about a third of the way to Baghdad from the Kuwaiti border.

US forces entered the outskirts after using helicopters and artillery to snuff out resistance from Iraqi tanks.

Thick smoke rose from the city and half a dozen burned-out Iraqi tanks were seen at its entrance.

The situation in Nasiriyah - which US officials had insisted on Saturday had been secured - was typical of stubborn resistance from Iraq forces.

Despite their superior firepower, the coalition was also battling to gain control of the southern border town of Umm Qasr, Iraq's only deep-water port, where they have been engaged in combat since the outbreak of war on Thursday.

While coalition forces vowed to suppress what one British sergeant called "pockets of resistance", officials in Baghdad pledged intensified Iraqi opposition to the US-led effort to end Saddam's 24-year grip on power.

"We let them go for a walk in the desert, but all our towns will resist," Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan said, cautioning coalition forces not to take false hope from their progress in the west.

A Iraqi military spokesman claimed Iraq had downed five "enemy" planes and two helicopters.

Top US officials gave conflicting accounts of reports that a US or British aircraft had been shot down over Baghdad as TV pictures showed Iraqi soldiers and civilians hunting along the Tigris river.

However, officials did confirm that a British Tornado fighter bomber had been reportedly shot down by a US-operated Patriot missile near the Kuwaiti border.

It is the latest in a string of accidents to plague the coalition, which saw 19 soldiers killed in two helicopter crashes in recent days.

Despite the clashes in southern Iraq, US forces pressed northward through the desert towards Baghdad, with troops just 100km from the capital.

The US Marines First Expeditionary Force kicked off a 72-hour drive north into Iraq on Sunday, while 12 US vessels carrying portable bridges and other equipment travelled through the Suez Canal to the Gulf.

British Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon warned that as coalition troops neared Baghdad, a desperate Saddam could resort to chemical or biological weapons.

In the north, US special forces teams began flying into Iraqi Kurdistan to help fight an alleged al-Qaeda-linked Islamist group and prepare for the opening of a northern front against Baghdad, a top Kurdish official said.

US forces bombed positions held by Ansar al-Islam (Supporters of Islam) around the town of Halabja for a second straight day early Sunday. The area was closed to journalists after an Australian television cameraman was killed in an apparent reprisal attack.

British military police also evacuated 60 journalists from the southern Iraqi town of Safwan today after a warning that 10 to 15 armed fighters loyal to Saddam Hussein were planning an imminent attack on the media.

Meanwhile the British broadcaster ITN said its veteran reporter Terry Lloyd was believed to have been killed in an incident yesterday in southern Iraq.

The fresh waves of air raids on Baghdad today followed a night of massive explosions that temporarily cut power to the city.

But the bombings seemed to be pinpoint attacks that lacked the intensity of raids unleashed on Baghdad on Friday, which Iraqi authorities said left three dead and more than 200 wounded.

US forces also targeted the key northern city of Mosul, with intense strikes on the outskirts of the oil city and to the east, in the direction of Kirkuk.

Iraqi Information Minister Mohammad Said al-Sahhaf told reporters on Sunday that cluster bombs dropped by US and British war planes on Basra, the country's second city and main port, had left 77 civilians dead and 366 others wounded.

The International Committee of the Red Cross voiced concern about the situation in Basra, saying it could not confirm casualty figures as its access to the city was limited.

Amid the US-led air assault and simultaneous ground push to Baghdad, Iraqi state television broadcast new images of a confident Saddam meeting with top political and military officials.

Iraqi officials have rejected any suggestion that Saddam's rule has been challenged.

British Foreign Office minister Mike O'Brien insisted Saddam had been injured in a cruise missile attack on one of his compounds on Thursday.

Coalition forces away from the front lines faced danger as well, with one US soldier killed in a grenade attack apparently carried out by one of his comrades.

Twelve other soldiers were injured in the grenade attack at Camp Pennsylvania, a sprawling and heavily guarded US military camp in the northern Kuwaiti desert that houses the elite 101st Airborne Division.

One soldier was taken into custody, but the motive for the attack was not immediately clear.

Worldwide opposition to the war remained vocal, with anger strongest in Muslim countries. About 200,000 angry anti-war protesters marched in the Pakistani city of Lahore.

In Vatican City, Pope John Paul II - who has been adamant in his opposition to the war - prayed for peace with 40,000 pilgrims.

The protests came despite new polls showing public sentiment in the United States, Britain and Australia - the three main countries involved in the war - swinging in favour of the campaign.

Agencies