After more than a decade of embargoes and ageing equipment, the once-powerful Iraqi war machine may soon face the most technologically advanced arsenal ever assembled.

“In terms of conventional warfare, any conflict between Iraq and the US would be a total mismatch,” says Jeremy Binnie, Middle East Editor for Janes Sentinel Security Assessment. “However, there are various asymmetric (unconventional) tactics that Iraq could employ which could make allied objectives more difficult to achieve.”

Recent announcements of further troop deployments have brought the number of US and British troops committed to the Gulf region to around 200,000.

Iraq’s armed forces are estimated at 389,000 (army 350,000, navy 2,000, air force 20,000 and air defence 17,000). Its paramilitary forces are thought to number around 44,000, and reserves 650,000 (Source: International Institute for Strategic Studies).

Advertisement

Despite their smaller numbers, allied ground combat units would be supported by aircraft such as the B-52, B-1B bombers, AC-130 and helicopter gunships. In any war, a key early objective for the coalition would the establishment of air superiority to protect allied forces from attacks by Iraqi aircraft

Iraqi Air Force

Before the Gulf War, more than 100 of Saddam’s most sophisticated fighter planes were flown to Iran to prevent destruction by Coalition forces. They were never returned. Unconfirmed estimates from Iraqi dissidents suggest that Iraq possesses fewer than 100 serious combat aircraft. Of these, around 50 may be operational at any one time. This compares with more than 800 allied aircraft including: B-2 stealth bombers (now with a forward base in Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean), F-117 stealth fighters, B-52 and B-1B bombers, F-15s, F-16s, F-14s, UK Tornadoes and a range of attack helicopters and gunships, including the AH-64D Longbow Apache. Iraqi air force sorties are likely to be one-way missions – or decoys aimed at luring allied aircraft into missile traps.

Iraqi Army

Despite the army’s apparent size, analysts question whether the majority of regular troops would put up much resistance. The inner circles of Saddam’s army, such as The Republican Guard and Special Republican Guard, are better trained, equipped and paid. Like the paramilitary force – the ‘Fidayin Saddam,’ headed by Saddam’s son, Uday – they are likely to prove more formidable opponents.

Iraq is thought to possess around 2,000 tanks, but only 700 or so are relatively modern Soviet T-72s – no match for approximately 1,000 US M1 Abrams and UK Challenger 2s main battle tanks.

There is growing consensus among military experts that Iraq would avoid large-scale, battlefield engagements in favour of withdrawing to cities to engage Coalition forces in a war of attrition. This would lead to great loss of life, both military and civilian.

Phillip Mitchell, Ground Forces analyst at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London believes Saddam may try to use high casualty figures as a weapon of a propaganda war: “Saddam will aim to cause allied casualties of sufficient magnitude to be politically unacceptable in both London and Washington.”

Technologies of war

Despite grabbing headlines and TV coverage, precision guided munitions accounted for around ten percent of all bombs dropped during the 1991 Gulf War. That figure will rise dramatically in any new war.

Patrick Garrett of security analysts GlobalSercurity.org in Virginia is sceptical of reports that Iraq has acquired electronic jammers designed to interfere with the GPS signals that guide some bombs – a worrying prospect for allied commanders seeking to minimise civilian casualties.

“No one knows for sure if these reports are true, or how well – or even if – jammers would work,” he says.

Equally unproven are reports that Iraq has acquired Ukrainian made, ‘Kolchuga’ passive radar systems that use powerful computers to process background radio frequencies to search for distortions caused by aircraft.

Unlike active radar systems that transmit signals, making them vulnerable to attack by radar-seeking missiles, passive systems linked by optical fibres don’t transmit. They simply ‘listen’, making them harder to locate.

Iraq’s radar systems – along with its 2,000 mostly Soviet surface to air missiles and anti-aircraft artillery batteries – will be the focus of first wave and sustained air strikes known as Suppression of Enemy Air Defence (SEAD) missions.

Unconventional weapons

Among the weapons available to the US are bombs or missile warheads designed to attack systems rather than people. These include so-called E-Bombs that generate electromagnetic fields more powerful than a lighting strike.

Another is the BLU-114/B ‘soft’ bomb that disables power distribution infrastructures. At low altitude, the spinning bomb releases canisters containing fine carbon filaments which open and spread out in a circular pattern to form a conductive spider’s web of trouble for any electrical equipment below. Another variant uses carbon dust that is drawn into electronic equipment by cooling fans, causing short circuits.

Unlike the E-bomb and soft bomb, thermobaric bombs are also devastating anti-personnel devices (see “Bunker busters enter action in Afghanistan”). Especially deadly in confined areas such as bunkers or caves, they also have an enormous psychological impact.

Small, shoulder fired thermobaric weapons are under development, but it is not known whether they will be deployed.

The wild card among unconventional weapons is electronic warfare and countermeasures – everything from signal and radar jamming to enemy computer and data hacking.

Unmanned air vehicles

Originally conceived as robotic spy planes, UAVs such as the Predator recently claimed a new role as strike aircraft after being fitted with ‘Hellfire’ anti-tank missiles. However, their main function will be reconnaissance. They can remain airborne for 24 hours, relaying vital real time images and sensor data.

High on the list of identification targets for manned and unmanned spy planes will be any remaining mobile Scud missile launchers. Of grave concern to planners is that as part of an endgame strategy,Saddam may attack Israel and allied troops with his estimated 20 Scud missiles armed with chemical or biological warheads. The consequences for the Middle East could be catastrophic.

Defeat seems inevitable for Saddam. The question remains how dangerous he would become in the end, and crucially, whether he could maintain the support of his generals should he decide to use the weapons of mass destruction Iraq has denied possessing for so many years.