U.S. President Donald Trump tweeted out his support early Saturday for the spontaneous protests against Irans strained economy that swept across the Islamic Republic Friday and Thursday.

"Many reports of peaceful protests by Iranian citizens fed up with regime's corruption & its squandering of the nation's wealth to fund terrorism abroad," he wrote. "Iranian govt should respect their people's rights, including right to express themselves. The world is watching! #IranProtests."

skip - trump

Many reports of peaceful protests by Iranian citizens fed up with regime’s corruption & its squandering of the nation’s wealth to fund terrorism abroad. Iranian govt should respect their people’s rights, including right to express themselves. The world is watching! #IranProtests — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 30, 2017

The economic protests began Thursday, sparked by social media posts and a surge in prices of basic food supplies, like eggs and poultry. Thousands went into the streets in several cities in Iran, beginning first in Mashhad, the country's second-largest city and a holy site for Shiite pilgrims. In Tehran, Irans capital, several protesters were reportedly arrested.

>> Iran in the north, ISIS in the south: The threats Israel will face in 2018 | Analysis >>

The spontaneous demonstrations appear to be the largest to strike the Islamic Republic since its 2009 Green Movement arose over allegations of voter fraud in the re-election of hard-line Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. However, information about them remains scarce as both state-run and semi-official media in Iran have not widely reported on the protests.

skip - Video from Qom posted on Twitter

Protesters in holly city of #Qom , center of Iranian Shia Islam, called the Pahlavi dynasty to take over again. pic.twitter.com/ohVuSXEH8H — Ali Hamedani (@BBCHamedani) December 29, 2017

skip - Iran

People of Mashhad shout "Islamic revolution was our mistake" during their protests against corrupted authorities of Iran Islamic regime today. pic.twitter.com/GZizf534NL — Babak Taghvaee (@BabakTaghvaee) December 28, 2017

Keep updated: Sign up to our newsletter Email * Please enter a valid email address Sign up Please wait… Thank you for signing up. We've got more newsletters we think you'll find interesting. Click here Oops. Something went wrong. Please try again later. Try again Thank you, The email address you have provided is already registered. Close

It's unclear what effect Trump's support for the demonstrations would have. Iranians already are largely skeptical of him over his refusal to re-certify Iran's nuclear deal with world powers. Trump's insistence in an October speech on using the term "Arabian Gulf" in place of the Persian Gulf also has also riled the Iranian public.

Meanwhile, U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson's comments in June to Congress saying American is working toward "support of those elements inside of Iran that would lead to a peaceful transition of that government" has been used by Iran's government of a sign of foreign interference in its internal politics.

The State Department issued a statement Friday supporting the protests, referencing Tillerson's earlier comments.

"Iran's leaders have turned a wealthy country with a rich history and culture into an economically depleted rogue state whose chief exports are violence, bloodshed and chaos," the statement said.