Breaking News Emails Get breaking news alerts and special reports. The news and stories that matter, delivered weekday mornings. SUBSCRIBE

TEHRAN, Iran — The most significant protests in eight years are rocking Iran, with state media reporting Tuesday that the death toll from clashes between demonstrators and security forces had reached at least 20.

Offering his first comments during the six days of unrest, Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei on Tuesday accused the "enemies of Iran" of meddling in the country's affairs.

In recent events, enemies of #Iran have allied & used the various means they possess, including money, weapons, politics &intelligence services, to trouble the Islamic Republic. The enemy is always looking for an opportunity & any crevice to infiltrate &strike the Iranian nation. pic.twitter.com/HIXtudRAue — Khamenei.ir (@khamenei_ir) January 2, 2018

Hundreds of people have been arrested and activists are taking the rare step of publicly criticizing the country's religious leaders. They are the largest protests since the country's disputed 2009 presidential election — which triggered the so-called Green Movement.

State TV reported Tuesday that six people had been killed during an attack on a police station in the town of Qahdarijan. It reported that clashes were sparked by rioters who tried to steal guns from the police station.

Iran's reformist President Hassan Rouhani appeared to acknowledge the seriousness of the protests Monday when he tweeted that "the authorities must pay attention to the people's demands."

What's happening?

The protests started out as local rallies against Iran's economic problems but have since spread in both geography and scope.

Iranians last week took to the streets of Mashhad, the country's second-largest city, to protest high inflation and the rising prices of everyday goods.

This frustration is hardly new. Many people expected that their financial situation would improve after Iran signed a nuclear deal in 2015 with the U.S. and five other world powers.

The country agreed to limit its uranium enrichment in exchange for sanctions being lifted. The economy has improved — but there is widespread anger that the benefits have not trickled down to ordinary citizens.

The demonstrations spread to Tehran on Saturday, with people chanting anti-government slogans and tearing down political posters.