TEHRAN, Iran (AP) — The latest on protests in Iran (all times local):

12:50 a.m.

Iran's semi-official Mehr news agency is reporting a gunman has killed one policeman and wounded three other officers during a protest gathering.

Without elaboration the late Monday report says the assailant used a hunting rifle to shoot the policeman in the central city of Najafabad, some 320 kilometers (200 miles) south of Iran's capital, Tehran.

This is the first report of a police officer being killed during five days of protests and raises the total number of dead to 13.

Earlier on Monday, Iranian state TV said 12 people had been killed amid the nationwide protests. The report said that included 10 deaths during clashes Sunday night when security forces repelled what officials described as "armed protesters" trying to take over police stations and military bases.

The protests began Thursday over economic issues and have since expanded to several cities. Hundreds have been detained since then.

___

12:30 a.m.

Germany has called on the government of Iran to let people exercise their right to peaceful protest.

German Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel said in a statement Monday that he was "very concerned" about reports of 12 deaths and numerous arrests.

He said that "we appeal to the Iranian government to respect the rights of demonstrators to assemble and raise their voice freely and peacefully."

He added that "after the confrontation of the past days it is all the more important for all sides to refrain from violent action."

Germany is one of the world powers that agreed to the landmark 2015 nuclear deal with Iran in which sanctions were lifted in return for Iran taking steps to limit its enrichment of uranium.

___

9 p.m.

Israel's prime minister wishes protesters in Iran "success in their noble quest for freedom."

Calling the protesters "brave" and "heroic," Benjamin Netanyahu said in a video posted to YouTube on Monday that the protesters sought freedom, justice and "the basic liberties that have been denied to them for decades."

He criticized the Iranian regime's response to the protests and also chided European governments for watching "in silence" as the protests turn violent.

Iran has seen its largest anti-government protests since the disputed presidential election in 2009, with thousands taking to the streets in several cities in recent days.

Israel considers Iran its greatest enemy, citing decades of hostile rhetoric by Iran's leaders, support for anti-Israel militant groups and its development of long-range missiles. Israeli decision-makers see a nuclear-armed Iran as an existential threat.

___

1:50 p.m.

Iranian state television says security forces have repelled "armed protesters" who tried to take over police stations and military bases.

The report on Monday says 12 people have been killed amid nationwide protests, including 10 during clashes Sunday night.

State TV said: "Some armed protesters tried to take over some police stations and military bases but faced serious resistance from security forces."

It did not say where the attacks took place.

Some online videos in recent days have purported to show protesters attacking police stations. Other videos have shown protesters peacefully demonstrating and welcoming police.

The protests began Thursday in Mashhad over economic issues and have since expanded to several cities. Hundreds of people have been arrested.

___

1:20 p.m.

Iranian state TV is reporting that 10 people have been killed amid nationwide protests, without elaborating.

The state TV report Monday made the reference in a package on the ongoing demonstrations that began Thursday.

Authorities have previously confirmed four deaths. It was unclear where the others occurred.

The protests began Thursday in Mashhad over economic issues and have since expanded to several cities. Hundreds of people have been arrested.

___

12:45 p.m.

An Iranian lawmaker says two more protesters have been killed and others wounded during a demonstration in the southwest amid nationwide protests over the government's handling of the economy.

A Monday report by the semi-official ILNA news agency quoted Hedayatollah Khademi, a representative for the town of Izeh, as saying the deaths happened there Sunday night.

He said the cause of death wasn't immediately known. Many in Izeh, some 455 kilometers (280 miles) southwest of Tehran, have hunting rifles in their homes.

Two demonstrators were killed during a protest in western Iran late Saturday.

The protests began Thursday in Mashhad over economic issues and have since expanded to several cities. Hundreds of people have been arrested.