Iranians angry over rising food prices and inflation protested in the country's second-largest city and other areas Thursday, putting new pressure on President Hassan Rohani as his signature nuclear deal with world powers remains in peril.

To really understand the Middle East - subscribe to Haaretz

The protests in Mashhad saw police make an unspecified number of arrests, local authorities said, though the country's powerful Revolutionary Guard and its affiliates did not intervene as they have in other unauthorized demonstrations since Iran's disputed 2009 election.

skip - Iran

"Our revolution [Islamic revolution 1979] was a mistake". "No Gaza, No Lebanon, our lives devoted to Iran", people of Shahrud shouted today during protests against corrupted authorities of Islamic regime due to their poor living conditions. pic.twitter.com/GXxzbpNiz4 — Babak Taghvaee (@BabakTaghvaee) December 28, 2017

It wasn't immediately clear how many people took part in Thursday's protests, though social media posts suggest several thousand likely demonstrated at rallies across at least three other cities.

skip - Iran

People of Mashhad shout "Islamic revolution was our mistake" during their protests against corrupted authorities of Iran Islamic regime today. pic.twitter.com/GZizf534NL — Babak Taghvaee (@BabakTaghvaee) December 28, 2017

Iran's state-run IRNA news agency quoted the governor of the northeastern city of Mashhad, Mohammad Rahim Norouzian, as saying there was an illegal "No to high prices" gathering in the city. "Police gave them the necessary notifications and confronted them with great tolerance," he said.

Keep updated: Sign up to our newsletter Email * Please enter a valid email address Sign up Please wait… Thank you for signing up. We've got more newsletters we think you'll find interesting. Click here Oops. Something went wrong. Please try again later. Try again Thank you, The email address you have provided is already registered. Close

Videos from a channel on the encrypted Telegram app showed people in Mashhad even chanting Death to Rohani, AFP reported, and Babek Taghvaee, an independent journalist, tweeted a video of protesters chanting the "Islamic revolution was our mistake."

skip - Iran

#IRGC Ground Force has cut Internet and telephone in some areas of Mashhad and has jammed signals of Satellite TV Channels of important news agencies such as BBC, VOA, Euronews, RT, Russia Today, CCTV & etc. in large cities of Iran!!! pic.twitter.com/rdW0RUibZO — Babak Taghvaee (@BabakTaghvaee) December 28, 2017

Taghvaee also reported that internet and telephone access to the area was also cut.

The prices of several staples, including eggs, have risen by up to 40 percent in recent days, with farmers blaming the hikes on higher prices for imported feed. Poultry is an important part of the diet of many of Iran's 80 million people, and previous price increases have caused political problems for its leaders in the years since the 1979 Islamic revolution.

So has inflation, which Iran's Central Bank says has returned to 10 percent. Youth unemployment remains high.

Tempers rose further after Rouhani submitted his 2018 budget to parliament, which raises departure taxes for those flying out of the country.

All this comes as the U.S. Congress weighs President Donald Trump's refusal to re-certify the nuclear deal. Many Iranians now say they agree with Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's repeated warnings the U.S. can't be trusted.

Khamenei also has kept up his criticism of how Rouhani's administration has handled the economy, which includes the supreme leader's opposition to allowing foreign firms to fully enter Iran. The Revolutionary Guard, a hard-line paramilitary organization, has vast economic interests in the country.

The Guard did not mobilize its Basij volunteer forces to counter any of the protests Thursday. However, some protests saw criticism of Iran's support for Syrian President Bashar Assad in his country's civil war, in which the Guard has played a major role.