Iran has lifted restrictions placed on the popular Telegram messenger service, officials confirmed Sunday.

Multiple reports emerged Saturday reporting Telegram was back online, two weeks after the government had shut the service down in the face of country-wide anti-government protests.

"The information concerning the end of filtering on Telegram is correct," a Telecoms Ministry spokesman told the Agence France-Presse news agency.

Read more: Iran protests: EU urges restraint, US and Israel up pressure

Frustrated Iranians take to the streets in anti-government protests Disillusionment on the rise High unemployment, high inflation and a deepening divide between poor and wealthy Iranians: The economic crisis in Iran is a major cause of frustration for many people. The easing of international sanctions following the 2015 nuclear deal has not improved people's living conditions as expected.

Frustrated Iranians take to the streets in anti-government protests Public uprising The majority of protesters so far are poor Iranians. People from major cities across the country converged on the capital, Tehran, to vent their anger when demonstrations began on December 28. They have since expanded to cities and towns in almost every province.

Frustrated Iranians take to the streets in anti-government protests Political demands It is not clear who is spearheading the protests, or if anyone is leading them at all. The demands have, however, become more political: stop backing the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon, no intervention in Syria and Iraq. The protesters are urging the government to focus on domestic problems. There have also been calls for Ayatollah Khamenei to step down.

Frustrated Iranians take to the streets in anti-government protests 'Enemies of Iran' Five days after the demonstrators first took to the streets, Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, reacted to the protesters' demands, accusing "enemies of Iran" of using "different tools including cash, weapons, politics and [the] intelligence apparatus to create troubles for the Islamic Republic."

Frustrated Iranians take to the streets in anti-government protests Harsh response Authorities report that 450 people were arrested in connection with the protests. Twenty-one people are believed to have died in violent clashes, among them 16 demonstrators. They are the largest protests Iran has seen since the disputed 2009 presidential election. Author: Hao Gui



Government backtrack

Authorities shut down Telegram, which counts at least 25 million users in Iran, on January 2 amid demonstrations focused on pay and prices complaints that evolved into protests against the Iranian government.

The week-long rallies, which sparked pro-government counter-demonstrations, left at least 25 people dead and over 1,000 people injured. Officials said Sunday that hundreds of protesters had been released from detention and that 465 people were still in custody.

Hardliners had accused foreign groups of inciting the protests via social media. Telegram initially bowed to government pressure and agreed to shut down one channel accused of encouraging anti-government rallies.

But authorities blocked the entire service after it refused to take down other allegedly anti-government channels.

Access to photo-sharing website Instagram and some VPN apps used to get around blocks to Twitter and Facebook were also restricted.

Read more: Shirin Ebadi on Iran protests: 'Government cannot silence the hungry forever'

Watch video 01:41 Share Mobile phone footage of protests in Iran Send Facebook Google+ Whatsapp Tumblr linkedin stumble Digg reddit Newsvine Permalink http://p.dw.com/p/2qEb0 Mobile phone footage of protests in Iran

Moderate fights back

President Hassan Rouhani, a moderate, reportedly pushed back against demands to block Telegram indefinitely, arguing that doing so would undermine citizens' rights and exacerbate job losses associated with the restrictions.

Rouhani favored open access before the protests, saying in December: "We will not seek to filter social media. Our telecoms minister promises the people he will never touch the filtering button."

Officials lifted restrictions on Instagram last week, but continue to block access to Facebook and Twitter.

Read more: Opinion: Is the end near for Iran's theocracy?

amp/jlw (AFP, Reuters, dpa, AP)