CLOSE Protests across Iran saw their most violent night as “armed protesters” tried to overrun military bases and police stations before security forces repelled them, killing 10 people, Iranian state television said Monday. Time

An image grab taken from a handout video released by Iran's Mehr News agency reportedly shows a group of men pushing traffic barriers in a street in Tehran on Dec. 30, 2017. (Photo: AFP)

Corrections & Clarifications: A previous version of this story misstated the name of the supreme leader who made the comments.

Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khameini accused the country's enemies of meddling in recent protests, in his first public comments since anti-government demonstrations erupted six days ago.

At least 21 people have died and 450 have been arrested in the nationwide protests that began Thursday in Mashhad and spread to other cities, according to Iranian media.

The unrest started over economic issues, such as rising prices and high unemployment, but widened to a general anger over alleged government corruption and discontent with Iran's clerical rulers.

Security services have used force and tear gas to disperse crowds.

According to comments published Tuesday on Khamenei's official website, the supreme leader said Iran's enemies had used money, weapons, politics and intelligence apparatuses "to create problems for the Islamic system."

Khamenei did not name a specific country or organization. He has the final say on all state matters. He said he would elaborate on the accusation in due course.

Iranian state television reported Tuesday that nine people were killed overnight: Six rioters were killed during an attack on a police station in the town of Qahdarijan; an 11-year-old boy and a 20-year-old man were killed in the town of Khomeinishahr; and a member of Iran’s paramilitary Revolutionary Guard was killed in the town of Najafabad.

The towns are all in Iran’s central Isfahan province, about 215 miles south of Tehran. The semi-official ILNA news agency reported that nationwide, 200 protesters were arrested Saturday, 150 on Sunday and 100 on Monday.

Iranian President Hassan Rouhani sought to downplay the significance of the protests in a cabinet session Sunday. "We are a free nation and people are free to voice their protests according to the constitution. At the same time, we need to be aware criticism should be expressed in a way so as to change the situation for the better," he said.

Still, Iran’s semi-official Tasnim news agency warned Tuesday that arrested protesters could potentially face the death penalty when they come to trial.

The agency quoted the head of Tehran’s Revolutionary Court, Mousa Ghazanfarabadi, as saying: "Obviously one of their charges can be Moharebeh," or waging war against God. The offense carries a death penalty in Iran. Iran’s Revolutionary Court handles cases involving alleged attempts to overthrow the government.

President Trump has made several statements of support for the protesters. He made another one Tuesday in a tweet that echoed his previous comments.

"The people of Iran are finally acting against the brutal and corrupt Iranian regime," Trump said in the tweet, in which he also blamed his predecessor for helping to strike a deal between Iran and six world powers over Tehran's nuclear program.

"All of the money that President Obama so foolishly gave them went into terrorism and into their 'pockets.' The people have little food, big inflation and no human rights. The U.S. is watching!" Trump said.

The Trump administration also called on Iran to stop blocking Instagram and other social media sites and encouraged Iranians to use special software to circumvent controls, such as virtual private networks, known as VPNs, said Undersecretary of State Steve Goldstein.

Washington is considering new sanctions on those responsible for the crackdown on protesters.

More: Iran unrest threatens Tehran's tyrants. Can protesters drive them out?

CLOSE Amateur video emerged on Saturday showing large protests in the central Iranian city of Hojedk. The footage showed protesters throwing stones at security officials and chanting "down with dictator". (Dec. 30) AP

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2lEcOwO