DONALD Trump has declared its "time for change" in Iran amid the country's crackdown on widespread protests that have left 12 people dead.

Officials today confirmed the deaths as mass demonstrations that began Thursday continued across the country.

AP:Associated Press Protests have erupted across Iran, with 12 people now reported dead

Today Trump said Iran was "failing at every level despite the terrible deal made with them by the Obama Administration".

He added: "The great Iranian people have been repressed for many years. They are hungry for food & for freedom. Along with human rights, the wealth of Iran is being looted. TIME FOR CHANGE!"

The protests began Thursday in Mashhad over economic issues and have since expanded to several cities. Hundreds of people have been arrested.

Two people are said to have been shot dead in the town of Izeh while another two died in Dorud after being hit by a stolen fire truck. State TV said six people were killed — three in “suspicious shootings” — in Toyserkan.

Reuters People stand near a burning car in Zanjan, Iran as protests rage

Other reports say three protesters died in Isfahan province after security forces opened fire.

Reporting on the latest deaths, state TV said: "Some armed protesters tried to take over some police stations and military bases but faced serious resistance from security forces."

It comes as Boris Johnson spoke of his growing "concern" yesterday after reports emerged of protesters being killed in the astonishing anti-Government demos.

In the biggest challenge to Tehran since 2009, protests across the country continued for a fifth day.

Reuters On New Year's Eve, a building was set on fire in Dorud

In one iconic image over the weekend, a lone woman took off her hijab and waved a white flag in defiance of the strict dress code in place since 1979.

After a two-day stand-off motorcycle cops were apparently rushing crowds and hitting them with batons.

Tehran cut off some internet access on Saturday in a desperate attempt to disrupt the protests.

The protests came with British officials desperate for news about the release of British mum Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe - locked in a Tehran jail on trumped up spy charges.

Reuters Protesters demonstrate over economic issues in Tuyserkan

Taking to Twitter the Foreign Secretary said: “Watching events in Iran with concern. Vital that citizens should have the right to demonstrate peacefully.”

Earlier US President Donald Trump risked inflaming the tensions by saying the “world is watching” the Iranian regime’s response.

And he accused the authorities of “squandering the nation’s wealth to fund terrorism abroad”.

Iran called the comments “deceitful and opportunistic”.

Reuters Debris covers the streets of the city whilst protests continue

Reuters Opponents of Iranian President Hassan Rouhani hold a protest outside the Iranian embassy in west London

Abdolreza Rahmani- Fazli, Iran’s interior minister, warned people not to take part in “illegal gatherings”.

Thousand still turned out for annual pro-government rallies to defeat the last major protest movement in 2009.

Call time on a foul regime Analysis by Douglas Murray SINCE 1979 the Iranian people have not had the most basic rights — the Mullahs dictate everything they can say and wear. But they cannot dictate forever. In recent days the anti-regime protests in Iran have dwarfed even the “Green Revolution” events of 2009. This country and all allies of free people should back the protesters and wish the end of a foul regime. The people deserve to have a say in their own future.

MOST READ IN NEWS CLASS RACE ROW Teachers blast Ofsted chief for telling them to quiz girls who wear hijabs POVERTY FEARS Primary school children 'stuff food in pockets and turn up in dirty uniforms' KNIFE WARNING Murdered teen's dad warns of 'killing epidemic' in London after recent deaths CASH ANGER NHS paid £535million MORE to EU countries than it got back for treating patients PRISON BREAK Killer serving life for strangling a mum let out of prison to buy a car EASTER MOANDAY UK set for 15cm of snow as freezing temperatures and torrential rain strike Trevor Kavanagh The writing's on the wall for real Labour after anti-Semitism scandal SHAME ON THEM Telford 'child abuser not prosecuted by CPS as underage victim had consented' FOR MEG AND COUNTRY Meghan's 'terrified' dad Tom WILL walk her down the aisle - for America UNI PAY UP University bosses pay up by £5,500 as staff wages fall by £2,400 BULLY CURB Bullying bailiffs face being stripped of their powers in government crackdown MUMS IN ARMS Churchill's grandson rows with Mumsnet over trans women on sleeper trains

But in cities across Iran, protesters ripped down posters of Ayatollah Khamenei, the Islamic Republic’s supreme leader.

Dozens of students at the University of Tehran chanted “death to the dictator” in apparent reference to the Ayatollah.

Security forces fired tear gas into the crowds.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.