“Let’s wait a couple more days and see what exactly happens,” said Masoom Stanekzai, the head of the Afghan government’s High Peace Council.

Even if the Pakistanis make good on their promise, other difficult questions surround Mr. Baradar, whose fate has become a weather vane of diplomatic relations and intelligence chicanery among the United States, Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Some critics wonder whether Mr. Baradar’s release would signify an act of genuine good will on the part of Pakistan, or rather a more cynical attempt to shape the power dispensation in Afghanistan before American combat troops leave by the end of next year.

“This shows blatant intervention of Pakistan in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, which is mainly the result of weak diplomacy by the Afghan government,” said Sayed Agha Fazel Hussain Sancharaki, the spokesman for the National Coalition of Afghanistan political bloc.

Even if Mr. Baradar were to become an ambassador for the nascent Afghan peace process, it is unclear how much traction he maintains among his own fighters after years in Pakistani custody.

All of that also presumes that Mr. Baradar is ready to give up the fight. Of the 33 Afghan Taliban prisoners who have been set free by Pakistan this year, several are thought to have returned directly to the battlefield.

Wahid Muzhda, a security analyst in Kabul who worked in the Foreign Ministry under the Taliban government, was skeptical of the value of a release of Mr. Baradar, if it does occur. “It’s not welcomed by the Taliban,” he said. “They do not trust anyone brought by Pakistan as Taliban representatives.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Rustam Shah Mohmand, a former Pakistani ambassador to Kabul, said that Taliban policy was to expel members who had been captured. “They believe that a detainee may speak the language of the captor and may have been brainwashed or trapped in different ways,” he said. “That is why they don’t accept him back into the movement.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Tuesday’s announcement in Islamabad was made by Sartaj Aziz, the government’s senior adviser on national security and foreign affairs. In an interview with Reuters, Mr. Aziz said Mr. Baradar could be released as early as this month.

But in later comments, Mr. Aziz said no date had been set. And a Foreign Ministry spokesman said in an interview that Mr. Baradar would be released “at an appropriate time.”

The shift by Pakistan came two weeks after Mr. Karzai visited Islamabad for talks with the Pakistani prime minister, Nawaz Sharif. During the meeting, Mr. Karzai repeated longstanding demands for Mr. Baradar’s release.

On Tuesday, Pakistani officials said that despite the stated wishes of the Kabul government, Mr. Baradar would not be released directly into Afghan custody but would most likely be set free inside Pakistan.

That would seem to play into Afghan fears that Pakistan’s military intelligence agency, the I.S.I., is attempting to insert itself into the peace process to influence the course of Afghan power.

But Mr. Faizi, the Afghan presidential spokesman, expressed a cautious acceptance that Mr. Baradar might be kept in Pakistan. “That’s O.K., provided we are sure he is accessible, we have an address for him, and he’s secure and protected,” Mr. Faizi said.

Previous Afghan Taliban prisoners have been set free in Baluchistan, the western Pakistani province where the insurgents enjoy sanctuary in rural villages along the border, which they use to rest and plan attacks inside Afghanistan.

The exact circumstances of the raid in which Mr. Baradar was arrested, in the Pakistani port city of Karachi, remain confused. American and Pakistani officials initially said they had not been targeting Mr. Baradar when they carried out the raid. They realized his identity only after several days of questioning.

But other accounts, some tied to Pakistani officials, suggested that the Pakistanis had deliberately picked up Mr. Baradar to control the tempo of nascent efforts to draw the Afghan Taliban into negotiations.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Since then Mr. Baradar has been held by Pakistani intelligence agents at safe houses around the country, officials say.