Afghan NGO Safety Office, 2010 4th Quarter Report

KABUL, Afghanistan – Triumphalism is not supposed to be in the prayerbook of the American military’s Church of Coin these days, but last Wednesday, Jan. 19, proved to be something of an exception. At the morning standup that day, Gen. David H. Petraeus, the top American commander in Afghanistan, was uncharacteristically jubilant. “We’ve got our teeth in the enemy’s jugular now, and we’re not going to let go,” General Petraeus exulted after being briefed on the military operations of the past 24 hours, according to two senior officers who saw the classified standup that day.

The standup is a daily ritual in which senior officers stand up and brief the commander on what has been happening around the battlefield; it is broadcast by videolink throughout American bases here. During the previous 24 hours in Afghanistan, coalition forces had fought in 143 engagements, 80 of them regular military and 63 of them mounted by special operations forces, according to a military spokeswoman, Maj. Sunset Belinsky. That resulted in 35 insurgents killed, 1 wounded and 72 captured, she said. (The military had not previously announced the overall results of operations Jan. 18-19.) While officials could not say immediately if that meant it was the busiest day for United States and coalition forces in Afghanistan, “it was certainly a high water mark,” a senior American official said.

General Petraeus has often cautioned his officers to avoid overconfidence, and to remember that in counterinsurgency what counts most is what happens over the long-haul, not in a single engagement or on one day. A senior American officer explained the general’s reaction: “He wasn’t saying we’re winning, but the enemy is feeling the pressure.” He continued: “He had been saying for a long time we have got to get our teeth into the enemy’s jugular, and this was a day on which it all came together. Fourteen hundred Marines have just arrived, and another battalion of trainers, and a couple more pieces of combat power have come in, and there’s a sense we have definitely got these guys on the run.”

Not so fast, say a lot of others here. “To borrow a phrase from the global warming debate, keep your eyes on the climate, not the weather,” wrote Nic Lee, head of the Afghan NGO Safety Office, in ANSO’s latest quarterly report, an independent and widely respected barometer of the war. Mr. Lee said that the insurgents’ attacks dropped off in Kandahar and Helmand Provinces, the main focus of the United States military offensive, from August to December last year. At the same time, he added, over all, insurgents had their busiest year in 2010, with attacks climbing steadily to a peak of more than 1,500 a month in September and increasing dramatically in two-thirds of the provinces.

Then their attacks began falling off throughout Afghanistan, a common phenomenon in wintertime, although even their low point of 785 attacks in December was higher than any single month in the previous four years with the lone exception of August 2009 (when presidential elections were held), according to ANSO’s data.

Afghan NGO Safety Office, 2010 4th Quarter Report

“The deep downturn could just as easily be interpreted as an early winter reprieve, after an intense summer fight, and would not represent any longer term degradation of capacity,” Mr. Lee wrote. “If the 2011 spring offensives sustain, or build on, the level of violence achieved this year then it will be a sure indicator that the surge operations achieved little.”

“Taking the national data as a whole we consider this indisputable evidence that conditions are deteriorating,” the report said.

As everyone says here these days, we will see who is right come springtime.