Colonel Dad blamed the ability of the Taliban to infiltrate from neighboring Pakistan — bringing in heavy weapons and other modern equipment, which he said included night vision gear that the Afghan forces lacked — for the reversal. He also said American air support had been missing in that southern part of Helmand, but has now been promised for a planned push to retake Khan Neshin.

Gen. Abdul Rahman Sarjang, the provincial police chief, confirmed the capture of the district government facility, but said Afghan forces were able to fall back with light casualties and would soon retake the district. “The Taliban only attack outposts and overrun them, and we are retaking those posts from them, so it does not mean they are dominating Helmand,” General Sarjang said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Two other important districts, Musa Qala and Now Zad, fell to the Taliban on Feb. 21. Nearby, the district of Sangin, where fighting throughout the war took more American and British lives than in any other single district, has been kept under government control only by the intercession of heavy American airstrikes and Special Operations troops, according to Afghan officials. In Kajaki, the government controls only the site of a major dam and hydroelectric station, where troops are surrounded by Taliban forces and resupplied mostly by air, according to Afghan officials who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to brief the news media.

General Sarjang, however, disputed the extent of the insurgents’ control in Helmand.

“The Taliban do not control half of Helmand, and we will not let them control it,” he said. “We are not denying they have strong presence in Helmand but they are always making propaganda that they will make the province fall, but it will never happen.”

The general also promised that a spring offensive by government forces would reverse recent Taliban gains.

In Kabul on Tuesday, the secretary general of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg, appeared at a news conference with President Ashraf Ghani. In contrast to previous upbeat pronouncements about Afghanistan’s future, Mr. Stoltenberg sounded a worried note. “2015 was difficult,” he said. “I expect 2016 to be difficult also. But the Afghan forces responded to the threats.”

There are about 10,000 American troops in Afghanistan, along with about 3,000 troops from coalition partners, mostly NATO countries.

Mr. Ghani said he still held out hope for progress on peace talks with the Taliban, although he did not mention whether planned talks scheduled for March — and already overdue by two weeks — were still on or not. Mr. Ghani also said security was improving in northern provinces, while two significant new units are being sent to reinforce the Afghan National Army’s 215th Corps, which has been ravaged by the fighting in Helmand.