Afghanistan explosion: Taliban suicide bomber, gunmen attack parliament building in Kabul killing two, wounding at least 30

Updated

A Taliban suicide bomber and several gunmen have attacked the Afghan parliament in Kabul, killing a woman and child and wounding at least 30 people.

The brazen attack on the symbolic centre of power raises questions about the NATO-trained Afghan security forces' ability to cope with militant attacks.

The attack began when a Taliban fighter driving a car loaded with explosives blew up outside the parliament's gates, Kabul police spokesman Ebadullah Karimi said.

Six gunmen who took up positions in a building near parliament were killed after a gun battle lasting nearly two hours, Mr Karimi said.

"The first explosion was a car bomb outside the parliament," Sune Engel Rasmussen, a journalist in Kabul, told ABC News 24.

"[The gunmen] didn't make it inside [the parliament]. They proceeded to attack the parliament building with RPGs, rockets, and a lot of gunfire from a construction site nearby, from an empty building where they could hide behind scaffolding."

Officials said a woman and a child were killed and around 30 civilians wounded in the attack.

Kabul police chief Abdul Rahman Rahimi said all MPs were safe.

The raid was carried out at the same time the Afghan president's nominee for the crucial post of defence minister was being introduced to parliament.

TV pictures showed the speaker sitting calmly and MPs leaving the building, engulfed in dust and smoke.

The incident raises questions about how the driver got through several security checkpoints.

Violence has spiralled in Afghanistan since the departure of most foreign forces at the end of last year.

The insurgents are pushing to take territory more than 13 years after the US-led military intervention that toppled the Taliban from power.

Politicians criticise security agencies for failing to prevent attack

Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid claimed responsibility for the assault.

"We have launched an attack on parliament as there was an important gathering to introduce the country's defence minister," he said by phone.

Lawmaker Farhad Sediqi was among several lawmakers who criticised security agencies for not preventing the attack.

"It shows a big failure in the intelligence and security departments of the government," he said.

Local media reports suggest there was another explosion in the Dahmazang area of Kabul.

The withdrawal of foreign forces and a reduction in US air strikes have allowed Taliban fighters, who ruled Afghanistan with an iron fist from 1996 to 2001, to launch several major attacks in important provinces.

The second district to fall to the Taliban on Monday was in the northern province of Kunduz.

Officials said it fell after urgently needed reinforcements failed to arrive.

The Taliban captured Dasht-e-Archi district a day after hundreds of militants fought their way to the centre of the adjacent district of Chardara.

"The Taliban managed to take it over this morning as the area has been surrounded for days," Nasruddin Saeedi, the district governor who escaped to the provincial capital, Kunduz city, told Reuters by telephone.

"There are many foreign fighters with heavy machine guns. We have asked for reinforcements, but none arrived."

Afghan soldiers were preparing a counter-attack to retake both districts, another local official said.

Reuters/AFP

Topics: terrorism, world-politics, unrest-conflict-and-war, afghanistan

First posted