The decision to publish the photos, provided by an anonymous soldier, also set off a debate about whether the newspaper had acted responsibly. Images published on the Times' website showed one soldier purportedly with a corpse's hand on his shoulder and others holding the severed legs of a suicide bomber. The Pentagon had asked the newspaper not to publish, fearing a backlash against troops. US Defence Secretary Leon Panetta said the actions of the soldiers were abhorrent and he feared what could occur as a result. "I know that war is ugly and it's violent and I know that young people sometimes caught up in the moment make some very foolish decisions," he said.

"I am not excusing that but neither do I want these images to bring further injury to our people or to our relationship with the Afghan people. We had urged the LA Times not to run those photos and the reason for that is those kinds of photos are used by the enemy." "The conduct depicted in those photographs is reprehensible and does not in any way represent the high standards of the US military," said White House spokesman Jay Carney. "The President certainly shares in the Defense Secretary's opinion that this should be investigated and those held responsible will be held accountable." Mr Carney said he did not know if Mr Obama had seen the photos. He repeated the Pentagon's argument that the newspaper should not have published the photos. LA Times editor Davan Maharaj said, "After careful consideration, we decided that publishing a small but representative selection of the photos would fulfill our obligation to readers to report vigorously and impartially on all aspects of the American mission in Afghanistan, including the allegation that the images reflect a breakdown in unit discipline that was endangering US troops."

LATimes.com also published a report on reaction from readers, much of it angry. The soldier who provided the Times with a series of 18 photos of soldiers posing with corpses did so on condition of anonymity. He served in Afghanistan with the 82nd Airborne's 4th Brigade Combat Team. He said the photos pointed to a breakdown in leadership and discipline that he believed compromised the safety of the troops. The photos were taken during a year-long deployment of the 3500-member brigade, which lost 35 men during that time, according to icasualties.org, a website that tracks casualties. At least 23 were killed by homemade bombs or suicide bombers. Despite some revulsion, reaction in Afghanistan was muted because many ordinary Afghans have no internet access. Evening TV bulletins did not show the photos. Suicide bombers, who cause hundreds of Afghan civilian deaths every year, are widely despised. Even so, the taboo against desecration of the dead is strong in this religiously conservative country.

"Always it is a matter of disrespect," said Farhad Mohammad, a merchant in the southern city of Kandahar. "We condemn Americans posing with dead bodies or body parts," said Najla Dehqan Nezhad, a member of parliament from the western province of Herat. "The actions of the individuals photographed do not represent the policies" of the NATO force or the US military, read a statement by US Marine Corps General John R. Allen, the commander of Western forces,in cluding Australian troops, in Afghanistan. He said the behavior was "entirely inconsistent" with the values of the US and its military coalition partners, and an investigation was under way. The US ambassador to Afghanistan, Ryan C. Crocker, issued a similar condemnation. "Such actions are morally repugnant," he said. Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai is expected to make a statement.

The US army has launched a criminal investigation. This is the latest in a series of damaging incidents and disclosures involving American troops in Afghanistan, which have come in close succession since the start of the year. Video that surfaced in January showed US troops urinating on the bodies of Taliban combatants. The following month saw the burning of Korans at an American-run military base, and in March, a US Army sergeant was charged in a deadly shooting rampage outside his base in Kandahar province, more than half of whose 17 victims were children. The Koran-burning, which American officials said was inadvertent, triggered nearly a week of deadly riots that broke out hours after the action came to light, leaving more than 30 people dead, including four US service members. Last month, the US military community were devastated when a sergeant serving in Afghanistan allegedly killed 17 Afghan civilians in a night-time rampage.

The latest scandal comes as ISAF coalition partners, including Australia, announce they will begin drawing down troops in the war-torn country a full year earlier than previously said. Prime Minister Julia Gillard confirmed this week that Australia's combat and training operations will finish by the end of 2013, and that Australia strongly backed reconciliation talks involving the Taliban. Ms Gillard said Australia's withdrawal will take 12 to 18 months from this point, with the bulk of the troops to come home at the end of the transition period. — with Los Angeles Times