Almost two in three Australians think the country's foreign policy places too much emphasis on the United States, and most people now oppose military involvement in Afghanistan.

International relations think tank the Lowy Institute issued the findings yesterday, part of its latest annual survey of opinions on foreign policy.

Australians would strongly prefer that the Democrats won next month's US presidential election.

About 73 per cent of respondents favour Democrat Senator Barack Obama. Only 16 per cent favour Republican Senator John McCain.

One in three people said Australia's international reputation had improved since the election of the Rudd Government, while 17 per cent thought it had worsened.

Almost half (46 per cent) thought the new Government hadn't made any difference.

Opposition to the war in Afghanistan has grown significantly, despite bipartisan support for Australia's involvement from the Labor Government and the Coalition Opposition.

Of those surveyed, 56 per cent opposed Australia's military commitment, and 42 per cent expressed support.

Asked why Australia was involved, 38 per cent referred to Australia's alliance with the US, 35 per cent cited fighting terrorists and only 17 per cent said the aim was to support a democratic Afghan government. The Greens have urged an immediate withdrawal of Australian forces from Afghanistan.

The poll also found disquiet about China's growing economic and military power.

More than 85 per cent of Australians think China will become ''the leading power in Asia'', while 60 per cent say ''China's aim is to dominate Asia''.

About one-third regarded China's emergence as a world power as a ''critical threat'' to Australia's interests in the next 10 years, a 9 percentage-point rise since 2006.

A narrow majority of Australians believed Australia should join with other countries in an effort to limit China's growing influence. Two- thirds think Australia is not doing enough to pressure China on human rights.

The survey shows the global financial meltdown has eroded economic confidence and goals such as protecting the Australian economy and jobs have overtaken tackling climate change as the most important foreign policy goal.

But despite this, climate-related issues continue to be seen as the biggest threats to Australian interests. Scarcity of water was seen as the most critical threat to Australia, with global warming ranking equal second with international terrorism.

A solid majority of opinion remains in favour of immediate action on climate change even if it involves significant costs.

Economic uncertainty has also reinforced economic nationalism with an overwhelming 90 per cent of Australians saying the Government has a responsibility to ensure major Australian companies are kept in majority Australian control.

A majority of Australians oppose major investments in Australia by banks or investment funds controlled by the governments of Britain, the United States, Singapore, Japan and the United Arab Emirates. They are most opposed to Chinese government-controlled investment.