THE leader of the Afghan resistance , Ahmad Shah Massoud, was reported to have been killed or seriously wounded yesterday in a grave setback to hopes of toppling the extremist Islamic Taliban regime.

A US official said "we believe he's dead" but refused to give any further details.

Judged a brilliant guerrilla commander by his former Russian foes, Gen Massoud had long carried the West's hopes in Afghanistan.

Opposition officials insisted that he was only slightly injured during the attack on Sunday, but his brother said the explosion set off by a suicide bomber disguised as a television journalist caused serious injury.

Ahmad Wali Massoud, the Afghan opposition's ambassador to Britain, said yesterday: "His condition is stabilising, but he is still unconscious, the doctor says it will be 10-12 hours before we know."

Gen Massoud was giving an interview at his base in the Panjshir Valley to two Arabs posing as journalists when a bomb went off.

The explosives were believed to have been hidden in a video camera the men were using or was strapped around the body of one of them.

Sources in central Asia said the assassins began their journey from Kabul and crossed Taliban lines to enter territory of Gen Massoud's United Front opposition, interviewing several of its commanders before they reached his base.

Front commanders and Western diplomats in central Asia said Gen Massoud was treated for serious head injuries by Russian army surgeons in Tajikistan, where he was flown after the blast.

Front spokesmen denied that he had died and accused the Taliban, the wanted Saudi terrorist Osama bin Laden and Pakistan of planning the assassination attempt.

The blast killed an aide, Azim Suhail, seriously wounded Massoud Khalili, the front's ambassador to India, and killed one of the bombers. Gen Massoud's guards shot dead the other bomber.

Aides said Gen Massoud talked to his commanders before the operation, giving them instructions and handing military command to his deputy, Gen Fakhim.

The Taliban chief spokesman, Abdul Hai Mutmaen, said the movement was not behind the incident, although it would be the biggest beneficiary of his death.

If Gen Massoud is dead or incapacitated for some time, the factional United Front, composed of minority ethnic groups opposed to the Taliban, could collapse, giving the militants complete control of Afghanistan.

The front controls only 10 per cent of the country, but in recent months Gen Massoud has succeeded in setting up new bases in western and northern Afghanistan while maintaining control of a small pocket of territory north of Kabul.

Between 2,000 and 3,000 Arabs under the command of Osama bin Laden fight for the Taliban, as does the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and thousands of Pakistani Islamic militants.

Arab militants under bin Laden have been held responsible for some of the worst recent massacres in the civil war, killing hundreds of civilians in areas controlled by the United Front.

Last week the Taliban launched a major offensive against the front outside Kabul and in Takhar province in the north-east.

An estimated 25,000 Taliban troops, including some 10,000 Arab, Pakistani and Central Asian Islamic militants are now likely to step up their offensive, in the hope that the attack will cause a collapse of morale among Gen Massoud's troops.

His forces have been bolstered recently by greater military support from Iran, Russia and India and Tajikistan has given him a military base to supply his troops in Afghanistan.

Gen Massoud was one of the first to begin resistance against the Communists who seized power in Kabul in 1978 and then a year later fought Soviet troops who invaded Afghanistan and occupied the country for nearly a decade.

Russian generals said he was the best Afghan Mujahideen commander they faced during the war. His forces seized Kabul in 1992, after the Soviet withdrawal and the collapse of the Communist regime.

He was defence minister under his ally President Burhanuddin Rabbani until they were pushed out of Kabul by the Taliban in 1996.