The Haqqani network, which traces its origin to the 1980s guerrilla war against the Soviets that was backed by the Central Intelligence Agency, is seen as having close links with the Pakistani military spy service, Inter-Services Intelligence, known as ISI.

Indeed, some senior Afghan officials say the Pakistani military was central to bringing the Haqqanis more closely into the Taliban during the insurgency’s leadership councils last summer, which were held in Quetta.

The United States contributes billions of dollars of aid to the Pakistani command, and American officials have pushed Pakistani officials to bring the Taliban to the negotiation table and ease the insurgent campaign in Afghanistan. But at the same time, the insurgency’s top leaders still find shelter in Pakistan, and a sweeping anti-militant operation by the Pakistani military in 2014 seemed to put no dent in the Haqqani group’s operations, casting doubt on Pakistan’s claims that it had distanced itself from the terrorist group.

“The ISI brought Sirajuddin as the deputy to the Taliban to give him protection, so if the peace talks get serious, the Americans wouldn’t be able to say, ‘We will make peace with the leader but not with the deputy,’ ” said Rahmatullah Nabil, Afghanistan’s former intelligence chief who now runs a charity for wounded Afghan soldiers.

Mr. Nabil said that the merger had been helped by the fact that the Haqqanis were struggling financially, after their chief fund-raiser was gunned down near Islamabad in 2013, and that the Taliban needed Mr. Haqqani’s expertise in waging complex attacks.

Even as American and Afghan officials have demanded that Pakistan do what it can to limit the insurgent offensive this year, there has been little obvious result. The Taliban command or contest large swaths of Afghan territory, threaten important provincial capitals and, through the Haqqanis’ bombing campaign, continue to create carnage and fear in Kabul, the capital.

“We have pressed the government of Pakistan on its commitment not to discriminate among terrorist groups,” Ambassador Richard Olson, the United States special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, said in a congressional hearing after the attack in Kabul last month. “Pakistan is at a strategic crossroads — I think it needs to make a choice.”