U.S.: Raids have taken out 900 Taliban leaders

U.S.-led military forces have captured or killed more than 900 Taliban leaders in the past 10 months, making it harder for the insurgency to maintain its offensive capabilities, according to the U.S. military in Afghanistan.

"We are getting indications that the (insurgency) is struggling to find replacements for leaders," said Maj. Sunset Belinsky of the International Security Assistance Force, which oversees coalition military operations in Afghanistan.

"In several cases, insurgents have actually refused to take over the leadership positions, have had difficulty finding technical experts, such as IED (improvised explosive devices) facilitators, gun runners and bomb trainers," she said.

The decapitation of leadership comes amid stepped-up raids by U.S. special operations units in Afghanistan. The raids have netted insurgent leaders, weapons and drugs used to finance actions against coalition forces, NATO says.

Among them:

•On March 1, U.S. and Afghan troops in Kandahar seized 20,000 pounds of bombmaking fertilizer, 15 heavy machine guns and ammunition and five rocket-propelled grenade launchers with 200 rounds. The ammonium nitrate fertilizer could have been used to make 400 IEDs, according to the Pentagon's Joint IED Defeat Organization.

•On Feb. 24, troops in Kandahar captured two Taliban leaders who had supplied insurgents with weapons.

•On Feb. 21 in Nangarhar province, troops destroyed drugmaking labs and seized 10,000 pounds of opium and heroin, which were used to finance attacks.

Some experts said it remains to be seen how much damage the raids have done to the Taliban's fighting ability.

Michael O'Hanlon, a military analyst at the Brookings Institution, said the strength of insurgent offensives in the spring and summer will indicate how successful the raids have been.

"The bottom line is that this figure is probably encouraging but hardly conclusive, especially since the effectiveness of insurgents on the battlefield still seems unaffected at a national level," he said.

Belinsky said damage to the insurgents' networks should be evident soon.

Raids on Taliban leaders began more than a year ago under Gen. Stanley McChrystal, who was the top commander in Afghanistan until he resigned last June. They have continued under his successor, Gen. David Petraeus.

Special operations troops total about 5,000 in Afghanistan, an increase of at least 40% in the past 18 months, said Jeffrey Dressler, a research analyst for the Institute for the Study of War.

Dressler, who conducted research for Petraeus last year, said the elite commandos have increased operations by 50% over that same period. Dressler said that thousands of Taliban insurgents remain in Afghanistan and Pakistan despite the raids and that it is difficult to say whether the loss of 900 leaders will have significance on the battlefield.

He said, however, that the Taliban in Afghanistan is showing a reluctance to fight and take orders from leaders in Pakistan. "It is a signal of progress," he said.

Brent Jones. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to For more information about reprints & permissions , visit our FAQ's. To report corrections and clarifications, contact Standards Editor. For publication consideration in the newspaper, send comments to letters@usatoday.com . Include name, phone number, city and state for verification. To view our corrections, go to corrections.usatoday.com