A SPECTACULAR attack in the capital of Afghanistan earlier this week might be said to have failed: the assailants were all killed before they reached their target. But then it succeeded in dealing a symbolic blow to the heart of the government. It also cast doubt on the sincerity of recent gestures made by the Taliban, which suggested that they would be open to restarting peace talks to end the country’s insurgency.

On Monday seven members of the Taliban attacked the parliament in Kabul with a suicide car bomb, rockets and assault rifles. Two civilians were killed, according to the UN, and more than 30 were injured.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.













At the time of the attack, lawmakers were gathered inside to vote on President Ashraf Ghani’s nominee for defence minister, Masoom Stanekzai. Everyone knew that the parliament would present a prime target for the insurgents, and so their success in getting past the gates to fire rockets directly at the building was remarkable. It is further evidence of the immense challenge Afghanistan’s security forces face after the drawdown of international troops.

The assault followed a string of recent attacks on judges, courts and guesthouses. With the government unable to safeguard its officials, civil politics can feel like fighting on the front line. "I’m a son of the war, we grew up with the war. Since I became an MP, I have been attacked five times," says Arif Rahmani, a lawmaker who survived the attack.

As they exploit the vacuum left behind by the departed foreign soldiers, the Taliban are also emboldened by an indecisive and shaky Afghan government. For months, Mr Ghani and his chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah, have failed to agree on appointments for key security positions, putting the government in deadlock. The parliamentary vote due on Monday would have been Mr Ghani’s third attempt to appoint a defence minister, more than nine months after his inauguration.

Although the attack was striking for the scale of its ambition, it is hardly a sign that Kabul is about to fall. Despite occasional bursts of violence, the capital is reasonably safe by Afghan standards. It is in the hinterlands that the most serious fighting is taking place.

Bolstered by an influx of foreign fighters, the Taliban have used their annual spring offensive to take strategic ground. In Kunduz, a northern province far from traditional Taliban heartland, insurgents last week took two central districts, causing anxiety among central officials that the provincial capital might be overrun. If that were to happen, it would be the first time the Taliban managed to take a city since their government was routed during the American-led invasion of 2001. The consequences would be devastating; Kunduz connects Kabul to several northern provinces and is country's main access to Tajikistan.

Yet at this stage the insurgents are probably not strong enough to take and hold a provincial capital. Perhaps that is why they focus mainly on rural areas that allow them freedom to move men, arms and drugs across districts and provinces.

The Taliban’s relentless operations—despite many clerics’ pleading with them to lay down arms for the duration of the current fasting month of Ramadan—prove the war is not over. There are however, signs of possible divisions within the movement.

Mr Ghani has been hard at work lobbying Pakistan to use its influence to bring the Taliban to the bargaining table. Since early May members of the movement’s political office, based in Qatar, have had informal meetings with people close to the Afghan government. Delegates from both sides stress that they act in personal capacity, though the high profile of some of them has spurred hope that peace talks could be on the horizon. Participants have included the Taliban’s chief negotiator, Tayyeb Agha; Afghanistan’s deputy foreign minister, Hekmat Khalil Karzai (a cousin of Hamid Karzai, the former president); and Shukria Barakzai, a female lawmaker who has suffered several attempts on her life.

Still, the fighting is getting worse. The question is whom exactly these Taliban delegates represent, and whether the insurgents on the ground share any appetite for a role in peacetime politics. At this point strategic disagreements between the Taliban’s leadership and disillusioned field commanders might be propelling the war. Whatever the logic on the Taliban side, peace talks are unlikely to get anywhere until this spate of violence subsides. An attack on the very symbol of democratic government undermines any attempt at reconciliation.