The fighting in Helmand, where the government has lost control of most territory beyond the provincial capital, has Afghan leaders scrambling to prevent the fall of the district. Reinforcements were sent to the scene of the battle on Tuesday, and the government’s chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah, flew into the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, along with senior security officials for emergency meetings.

Provincial council members say that of the 14 districts in Helmand, Afghanistan’s largest province in terms of territory and poppy cultivation, the government fully controls only two. Six districts are contested, and six others are largely controlled by the Taliban.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

With the Taliban at the gates of Lashkar Gah, the fear that another major provincial capital will fall has led the NATO mission in Afghanistan to take a greater advisory role there. The United States has announced that about 300 Marines will take over that role in the spring, more than two years after the Marines left the province following years of bloody fighting.

During a meeting on Tuesday in Lashkar Gah that lasted more than six hours and was attended by senior NATO generals, Mr. Abdullah and his team tried to assess the vulnerabilities in the province and the steps that needed to be taken to recapture some of the lost territory before the spring fighting season.

“The police in Helmand are not in good condition,” said Javid Faisal, a spokesman for Mr. Abdullah, adding that the police force and the army needed to be strengthened.

Haji Mirajan, a member of the Sangin district council, said that little territory in the district remained under government control, and that Afghan forces were fighting to keep control of a few army posts and the district governor’s building.

Mr. Mirajan said the fact that the Taliban could tunnel right under an army base and set off explosives showed how limited the movement of Afghan forces had become in the district center. “The Taliban dug a long tunnel from the lower end of the bazaar, which they are controlling, to the clinic where army soldiers were and blew it up with explosives,” he said.