The United States presence in Afghanistan received another political black eye on Wednesday after The Los Angeles Times published photographs apparently showing United States soldiers posing with body parts of dead insurgents. Reacting quickly, a wide assortment of American officials, all the way up to President Obama, condemned the actions. Our colleagues Graham Bowley and Alissa J. Rubin report that Leon E. Panetta, the defense secretary, said of the photographs: “This is not who we are, and it’s certainly not what we represent when it comes to the great majority of men and women in uniform.” President Obama called for an investigation of the matter and said that those responsible would be held accountable, according to the White House.

The episode was one more embarrassment piled on top of several others — one per month, since the start of the year — that have made the negotiated exit of Western forces from the country even more tense. In January, it was revealed that four Marines had videotaped themselves urinating on dead insurgents. Then in February, word that NATO personnel had burned an undisclosed number of Korans at Bagram Air Base set off deadly riots. In March, the mass killing of Afghan villagers by a rogue American soldier in Kandahar Province further strained the Afghan-American relationship.

The pictures released Wednesday are not believed to be recent. A spokeswoman for international forces in Afghanistan told Mr. Bowley and Ms. Rubin that she believed the photographs were taken in 2010. The Los Angeles Times said in its article that the photographs were taken in February 2010 in Zabul Province and were given to them by a soldier who served in Afghanistan with the 82nd Airborne’s Fourth Brigade Combat Team from Fort Bragg, N.C.

Secretary Panetta was forced to react to the photographs while attending a summit in Brussels where the United States and its NATO allies were trying to finalize agreements to wind down the war in Afghanistan. Our colleague Elisabeth Bumiller reports that Mr. Panetta and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton were still able to formalize three crucial commitments: “to increasingly move the Afghans into a lead combat role; to keep some international troops in Afghanistan beyond 2014, the year all American forces are supposed to be home; and to pay billions of dollars a year to support the Afghan security forces.”