Originally published Tuesday, August 24, 2010 at 10:03 PM

Comments (3) E-mail article Print view Share

Additional charges have been filed against five Joint Base Lewis-McChord soldiers accused of involvement in one or more of the murders of Afghan civilians in January, February and May of this year. These charges result from the investigation into the three murders as well as an assault on a U.S. soldier in their platoon. Charges also have been filed against seven other soldiers from the brigade.

Additional charges have been filed against five Joint Base Lewis-McChord soldiers accused of involvement in one or more of the alleged murders of Afghan civilians in January, February and May of this year.

All five are part of the 5th Brigade, 2nd infantry Division that went to Afghanistan in the summer of 2009 and returned this summer. In July the outfit was renamed the 2nd (Stryker) Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division.

These charges result from the investigation into the three deaths as well as an assault on a U.S. soldier in their platoon.

Spc. Jeremy Morlock, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Added charge: Art. 81, with one specification of conspiracy to commit premeditated murder and one specification of conspiracy to commit assault and battery.

Added charge: Art. 134, wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation.

Added charge: Art. 92, violating a lawful general order.

Added charge: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

Staff. Sgt. Calvin Gibbs, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Added charge: Art. 81, with one specification of conspiracy to commit premeditated murder, one specification of conspiracy to commit assault and battery, and one specification of conspiracy to commit aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Added charge: Art. 134, with two specifications of conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline, two specifications of wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation, one specification of communicating a threat to injure.

Added charge: Art. 128, with one specification of unlawfully striking another soldier, and one specification of committing an assault with a dangerous weapon.

Added charge: Art. 92, with two specifications of dereliction of duty, and one specification of violating a general order.

Spc. Michael Wagnon, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Added charge: Art. 81, with one specification of conspiracy to commit premeditated murder, and one specification of conspiracy to commit aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Added charge: Art. 128, committing an assault with a dangerous weapon.

Added specification: Art. 134, conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline.

Pfc. Andrew Holmes, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Added charge: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit premeditated murder.

Added charge: Art. 134, conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline.

Added charge: Art. 92, violating a general order.

Added charge: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

Spc. Adam Winfield, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Added charge: Art. 81, with one specification of conspiracy to commit premeditated murder and one specification of conspiracy to commit aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Added charge: Art. 128, committing an assault with a dangerous weapon.

Added charge: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

7 others charged

As a result of the initial investigation and the beating of a U.S. soldier, charges also have been referred against seven other soldiers. All seven also are assigned to the 5th (Stryker) Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division, later renamed the 2nd (Stryker) Brigade, 2nd Infantry Division.

These charges are as follows:

Staff Sgt. Robert G. Stevens, Headquarters and Headquarters Company, Brigade Special Troops:

Charge 1: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Charge 2: Art. 107, with two specifications of making a false official statement.

Charge 3: Art. 128, aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Charge 4: Art. 134, wrongfully and wantonly engaging in conduct likely to cause death or bodily harm to other soldiers.

Charge 5: Art. 92, dereliction of duty.

Sgt Darren N. Jones, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Charge 1: Art. 81, with one specification of conspiracy to commit assault and battery, and one specification of conspiracy to commit aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Charge 2: Art. 128, with one specification of unlawfully striking another soldier, and one specification of committing assault with a dangerous weapon.

Charge 3: Art. 134, wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation.

Charge 4: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

Cpl. Emmitt Quintal: B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Charge 1: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit assault and battery.

Charge 2: Art. 134, wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation.

Charge 3: Art. 128, unlawfully striking another soldier.

Charge 4: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a schedule I controlled substance.

Charge 5: Art. 92, violating a lawful general order.

Staff Sgt. David Bram, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment:

Charge 1: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit assault and battery.

Charge 2: Art. 134, wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation.

Charge 3: Art. 128, unlawfully striking another soldier.

Charge 4: Art. 92, with one specification of violating a lawful general order, and one specification of dereliction of duty.

Pfc. Ashton Moore, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment

Charge 1: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon.

Charge 2: Art. 128, assault with a dangerous weapon.

Charge 3: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

Spc. Adam Kelly, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment

Charge 1: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit assault and battery.

Charge 2: Art. 128, unlawfully striking another Soldier.

Charge 3: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

Charge 4: Art. 134, wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation.

Spc. Corey Moore, B Company, 2nd Battalion, 1st Infantry Regiment

Charge 1: Art. 81, conspiracy to commit assault and battery.

Change 2: Art. 134, with one specification of wrongfully endeavoring to impede an investigation, and one specification of conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline.

Charge 3: Art. 128, unlawfully striking another soldier.

Charge 4: Art. 112a, wrongfully using a Schedule I controlled substance.

Source: Joint Base Lewis-McChord