A spokesman for the military’s Central Command said the report had been forwarded to Adm. William J. Fallon, the senior American officer in the region, for review.

The military, which is conducting its own criminal investigation, has said that the marines involved were being kept in Afghanistan and that the rest of their 120-man company has been pulled out of the country. One senior official who has served in Afghanistan said in a recent interview that such a recall was unprecedented and was a sign of the seriousness of the incident.

The deputy director of the human rights commission, Nader Nadery, warned that incidents like the highway shooting have greatly contributed to outrage in Afghanistan, contradicting efforts by coalition forces to win people’s support away from the Taliban.

“There is a high level of frustration among the public and civilians that they are victims of both sides of the conflict,” he added.

Photo

In Spinpul, where the incident happened, and in the whole province of Nangarhar, that frustration is evident. Still mourning, the families of the victims said this week that they had demanded from President Hamid Karzai and the American generals they had met that those responsible be punished. Some of them said the soldiers should be tried under Islamic law and face the death penalty if found guilty of the killings.

“They committed a great cruelty; they should be punished,” said Ghor Ghashta, 65, whose daughter-in-law was killed at the door of their farmhouse compound, several hundred yards from the road and the scene of the blast. The American troops were firing from the road and raked the river bed where workers were digging a ditch and the surrounding fields with gunfire, he and other witnesses said.

“She was cutting grass in the field and she was carrying the bundle of grass on her head back into the house for the animals,” said his eldest son, Abdel Muhammad, 25.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“There was a big blast and then I heard firing. I started walking toward my house,” he said. “When I reached the house, my sister called and said my sister-in-law had been killed,” he said. The young woman, Yadwaro, 16, was shot in the back and fell dead across the threshold, he said. Her husband, Tera Gul, 18, sat listening silently to his brother and then got up and walked away.

The suicide bomb attack happened some 500 yards along the road from the bridge that gives the village its name, White Bridge, on the main highway about 25 miles east of the town of Jalalabad. A man driving a minibus in the opposite direction to the Marine unit exploded his vehicle as he passed the convoy of five or six Humvees, according to the commission’s report, which was drawn from interviews with witnesses, police officers, community leaders and hospital officials. One marine was wounded by shrapnel from the blast, it said.

The convoy may then have come under small arms fire from one vehicle on the same side of the road as the bomber, Mr. Nadery said. In the days after the episode, the United States military said that the convoy had come under a “complex ambush from several directions,” but the human rights commission questioned this.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“If such an attack did indeed occur, as it is claimed by the U.S. military, it was almost certainly very limited in scope and restricted to the immediate site” of the suicide bombing, it said in its report.

Two Humvees then moved forward 500 yards to the bridge and opened fire with roof-mounted machine-guns on a car that had stopped on a side road, some yards from the highway. The gunners then swung their weapons around and began firing on the nearby river bed and fields. They killed six people instantly and wounded at least another, the report said.

The driver of the car, a veteran mujahedeen fighter who goes by the name of Lewanai, 45, was wounded but survived the shooting by diving out of his door and scrambling behind a mound of earth. But the big guns shredded his car and the three people inside: his father, Hajji Zarpadshah, 80; his uncle, Hajji Shin Makhe, 75; and his nephew, Farid Gul, 16.

Photo

“It was an illegal action,” he said. “I know the army rules, and when I heard the blast I stopped my car, I was thinking in case they shoot me,” he said in an interview at his home nearby. “They opened fire and were shooting for 10 minutes.”

The car, now parked at a nearby gas station, is torn by gashes from the bullets over its hood, side and roof and the seats are shredded from the power of the gunfire, the ceiling is smattered with debris and bits of blood and bone. Mr. Nadery said that the vehicle had been hit by 250 bullets.

“Their insides were all coming out,” said Noor Islam, 22, who saw the dead men in the car after the attack. “We were very upset. Two of them were old men with white beards, and one was young,” he said. “They had no weapons.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Near the car was Shin Gul, 70, who was waiting for a ride to the nearby bazaar of Markoh where the family had a shop selling sacks of flour. He was cut down on the spot and his body so torn apart that his son, Muhammad Ayub, 35, said he could not recognize him when he first came on the scene. “I saw a notebook in his pocket and then I knew it was him,” he said.

Nearby a 30-year-old shepherd named Farid was shot. He died two weeks later in the hospital.

Mr. Ayub said he was with a group of workers digging a ditch in the river bed when they came under fire from the Humvees at the bridge. They all survived by taking cover in the ditch, but the bullets went over their heads. Those were the shots that killed the newlywed girl, Yadwaro, about 100 yards beyond.

As the Humvees pulled away across the bridge they opened fire on a gas station and other vehicles, killing four people in one minibus, including a 1-year-old child, the report said.

In more incidents over the 10-mile stretch of road from Spinpul, the marines killed six more people and wounded 25.

The report covered other civilian killings in recent weeks, including extensive human-rights violations by Taliban fighters and their allies, like beheadings and the mutilation of victims.

In other cases involving coalition troops in Afghan, the report detailed an airstrike in Kapisa Province in March that killed a family of nine people, including two pregnant women and four children younger than 5.

The report also criticized ongoing house raids by American forces, including one on the house of one of the human rights commission’s staff members, who the report said was hooded and handcuffed to a detonator and told not to move in case it exploded.