By Lee Berthiaume

OTTAWA • Defence department figures released Wednesday put the final, official tally on the number of Canadian soldiers wounded during the 10-year Afghanistan combat mission at more than 2,000.

Twenty soldiers were wounded in action in 2011, the fewest since Canada took over responsibility of Kandahar in 2005. A further 168 received “non-battle injuries.”

That brings the total number of Canadian soldiers wounded in action during the mission (April 2002 to December 2011) at 635; another 1,412 suffered non-battle injuries.

[np-related]

Four Canadian soldiers were killed in 2011, bringing the total to 158.

History will show 2009 was the bloodiest year. Canadian soldiers suffered roadside and suicide bomb attacks while patrolling Kandahar, came under rocket and mortar attack in their encampments, and engaged in sporadic firefights with an elusive foe.

In that year alone, 454 Canadians were wounded and 32 were killed.

The Defence department classifies injuries and deaths in action as those suffered as a direct result of combat, including explosives, mines, rocket attacks and direct fire, as well as friendly fire incidents.

Non-battle injuries include traffic accidents, the accidental discharge of a weapon and other accidental injuries unrelated to combat.

The Defence figures do not include the thousands of Canadian soldiers suffering from post-traumatic stress and other psychological damage.

A recent Defence department study predicted up to 13.2% of the 40,000 Canadians who served in Afghanistan could be suffering such injuries. Veterans Affairs Canada said 6,732 Afghan vets were receiving disability benefits as of Oct. 1, 2011.

While the end of the winding-down of the combat mission in Kandahar over the past two years saw the number of soldiers killed and wounded decline significantly, the presence of 950 Canadian military trainers in Kabul and two other sites in central Afghanistan until 2014 means the threat of injury and death has not disappeared.

Canadian soldiers helped fend off an insurgent attack on a NATO compound in Kabul in September, while Master Corporal Byron Greff was killed when a suicide bomber slammed a car into a NATO bus in October.

Postmedia News