A major offensive was underway Thursday in southern Afghanistan, with thousands of U.S. Marines mounting their largest operation since the battle of Fallujah in Iraq in 2004.

One Marine has been killed and several others were wounded in Operation Khanjar - or "Strike of the Sword - in the Helmand Province, a Taliban stronghold.

Some 4,000 American troops and 650 Afghan soldiers set out in helicopters and Humvees under cover of darkness to clear the region.

"You're going to change the world this summer and it starts this morning. The United States and the world are watching," Lt. Col. Christian Cabaniss, commander of the 2nd battalion, 8th Marines, told his troops.

The ambush was designed to clear, then hold, a province where U.S. troops have been unable to access many areas during the eight-year war.

Despite the early casualties, military commanders said they have seen only sporadic resistance during the operation, which took place in 100-plus degree

weather.

"The enemy has chosen to withdraw rather than engage for the most part," Marine spokesman Lt. Abe Sipe said.

The offensive is part of President Obama's new troop surge in Afghanistan to help secure the area ahead of Aug. 20 presidential elections.

"Where we go we will stay, and where we stay, we will hold, build and work toward transition of all security responsibilities to Afghan forces," Marine Corps Brig. Gen. Larry Nicholson said in a statement.

The number of U.S. soldiers in Afghanistan is expected to reach 68,000 by year's end - double the number in 2008.

Thousands of U.S. Marines and soldiers from the 10th Mountain Division's 3rd Brigade Combat Team are stationed in Helmand.

"We are kind of forging new ground here," said Capt. Drew Schoenmaker, of Greene, N.Y., commander of Bravo Co., 1st Battalion, 5th Marine Regiment. "We are going to a place nobody has been before."

The operation supports U.S. Gen. Stanley McChrystal's strategy to focus on securing the Afghan people with the hope they reject Taliban influence.

"The measure of effectiveness \[in Afghanistan\] will not be the number of enemy killed, it will be the number of Afghans shielded from violence,"

McChrystal, the new U.S. commander in Afghanistan, said last month.

With News Wire Services

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!