Ask Afghans who knew Mr. Massoud what it was about him that inspires such grief, and they struggle. Like Mr. Dashti, they talk of his skills as the guerrilla commander who astonished Soviet generals he outfought during the occupation of the 1980's, or of his years holding out against the Taliban, when almost all other guerrilla leaders had joined the Taliban or fled abroad.

They speak of Mr. Massoud's directness, his lack of pretense or false piety, his modesty, the look of somber intensity that rarely left his face. But usually, they give up, as people do when they try to define charisma. Mr. Dashti, the editor, resorted, in the end, to the simplest words. ''We loved him,'' he said. ''We loved him more than we loved our own mothers and fathers. He embodied everything we loved about Afghanistan.''

Mr. Massoud was a Tajik, from the ethnic minority that predominates in northern Afghanistan and accounts for about half of the two million people in Kabul, the capital. His heroics in the war with the Russians occurred mostly in the Panjshir Valley, deep in the mountains of the Hindu Kush, and mostly within 100 miles of Jangalak, his native village, on the banks of the alpine river that gives the valley its name.

But as Afghanistan began three days of official commemorations this weekend, Mr. Massoud emerged as far more than a regional leader. President Hamid Karzai said at a memorial meeting in Kabul on Saturday that majority Pashtuns in his hometown of Kandahar, where Mr. Karzai survived an assassination attempt last week, spoke to him with passion of ''the great Massoud.''

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The title was given to him by the post-Taliban government, and appears on posters and billboards throughout many Afghan cities.

In Jangalak and at Mr. Massoud's green-domed mausoleum high above the river, where Mr. Karzai and thousands of other pilgrims have come in recent days, much of the talk has been of the might-have-beens. Men who fought under the assassinated leader, and men who never met him, have spoken of him as the man who could have been Afghanistan's Napoleon -- a soldier who could have become a statesman, a man with the wisdom and the toughness thought by many Afghans to be lacking in the men now trying to guide Afghanistan out of the chaos left by the Taliban.

For Mr. Dashti, the editor, it has been an opportunity to tell the story of how Mr. Massoud died, a narrative that was lost at the time when his aides at Khwaja Bahouddin, the remote town in northern Afghanistan where the assassination took place, decided to tell the world for much of the following week that their leader had been wounded, not killed. By the time they announced his death, Sept. 11 had intervened.

Most Afghans believe the Massoud killing and the attacks in the United States were linked -- most likely, they say, by a Qaeda decision to eliminate Mr. Massoud ahead of the Sept. 11 attacks and thus deprive America of Afghanistan's most able commander as an ally. With his assassins dead, the theory remains unproved. But from Mr. Dashti's account, one thing the attacks had in common was the seemingly nerveless way in which the Arab militants carried out their mission, knowing that their own deaths were assured.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the nine days they spent at Khwaja Bahouddin before Sept. 9, Mr. Dashti said, the two men did nothing that signaled to anybody, even Western reporters who shared their guest house, that they were anything but journalists. Even when they went to see Mr. Massoud, he said, they behaved with a cool courtesy, chatting with him about Al Qaeda and the Taliban before settling in for the interview and detonating the bomb. ''They were perfectly at their ease,'' Mr. Dashti said.

Up at Mr. Massoud's mausoleum, with the sun setting over fields of harvested grain beside the Panjshir River, aging men with graying beards who fought under Mr. Massoud against the Russians have other stories to tell -- of how he drew Soviet tank columns into the valley and destroyed them, of his devoutness as a Muslim, of the long conversations into the night, over smoking fires, in which he spoke of his vision of a free, united Afghanistan.

How he was killed, those veterans say, was not important, only that he died a martyr. ''Al Qaeda killed him, but it was Allah's will,'' one said. ''And whatever Allah decides, we must accept.''