To that end, American military officers in Kabul and at the Pentagon have been developing plans for a commando force that could carry out raids against terrorist groups. Such a force would also need logistical support and arrangements for rapid medical evacuation, as well as helicopters that could whisk them to the battlefield and warplanes that could carry out airstrikes if they needed additional firepower.

Another objective, Mr. Rhodes said, would be to “ensure that Afghan national security forces are trained and equipped.”

According to a recent Pentagon report, only one of the Afghan National Army’s 23 brigades is capable of operating without support from the United States and other NATO nations.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

To help the Afghan military become more self-sufficient, the United States and its NATO allies have been discussing plans to advise Afghan troops after 2014. Gen. John R. Allen, the American commander in Kabul, initially outlined a series of options that ranged from 6,000 to 20,000 troops to carry out such missions.

After the White House pressed for lower troop options, the Pentagon offered three plans that would leave 3,000, 6,000 and 9,000. Given the demanding nature of the mission in Afghanistan, the Pentagon officials have indicated the upper end of that limit is more realistic.

Douglas E. Lute, the senior White House aide on Afghanistan, suggested that the requirement for troops could be low if the United States made progress against Al Qaeda over the next two years and the Afghan military improved.

“The ranges are completely derivative from different assumptions about the variables,” Mr. Lute said. “And that process with John Allen continues even as recently as today.”

Anthony H. Cordesman, a prominent military analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said in a recent report that the administration had disclosed so little about its plans for a military or civilian transition in Afghanistan that the debate over troop numbers was not meaningful.

“This lack of public and transparent plans and reporting makes it impossible to determine whether there is a real transition plan or a disguised exit strategy,” he wrote.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Karzai will meet Mr. Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton at the White House on Friday. On Thursday, he will confer at the Pentagon with Secretary of Defense Leon E. Panetta. He is also scheduled to speak at Georgetown University on Afghanistan’s future.