KABUL -- Some powerful Afghan politicians and tribal leaders have expressed doubts that more U.S. troops can turn the tide of the war, as President Barack Obama prepares to unveil a new Afghanistan strategy Tuesday.

President Barack Obama has been briefing allies about his plans for Afghanistan. He's expected to tell the public -- and lawmakers -- how many more troops he'll send and that it's not an open-ended commitment. Video courtesy of Fox News.

"We should focus on building the Afghan security forces, not sending more troops," said Sebgatullah Sanjar, the chief policy adviser to Afghan President Hamid Karzai.

The U.S. and its allies hope that by sending more troops they can push the Taliban back from areas where they have been operating freely for years, and impede the insurgents' ability to operate. This would create the space needed to bring development and begin to win over a war-weary population.

A minority in the Afghan government, such as the interior minister and certain leading officials in the country's security forces, has spoken publicly in favor of the increase. Moreover, many residents of peaceful non-Pashtun areas of the country say they welcome a troop increase as a way to keep insurgents at bay.

Afghan soldiers and police guard the scene of a rocket attack near the Serena Hotel in Kabul that injured four people on Nov. 21. Getty Images

But several senior Afghan officials said the U.S. should deploy troops only to the porous border with Pakistan and not the country's interior. Mr. Karzai has said publicly that he welcomes more troops, but close aides said he hoped the troops would go to the border.

Many tribal heads and local leaders from the Pashtun south and east -- the heartland of the Taliban insurgency -- have gone further, calling for troop withdrawals. "I don't think we will be able to solve our problems with military force," said Muhammad Qasim, a tribal elder from the southern province of Kandahar. "We can solve them by providing jobs and development and by using local leaders to negotiate with the Taliban."

Such views could pose a challenge to the U.S., which would require the support of the Pashtun population in order to succeed. "People are starting to view the Americans as occupiers, and in that context more troops would be risky," said Hanif Shah Hosseini, a lawmaker from Khost province.

Officials cite night raids, civilian casualties and lack of development as reasons why the standing of U.S. troops has lowered in some Afghans' eyes. When the U.S. forces enter an area, the levels of violence generally increase, causing anger and dissatisfaction among the local population. Some officials point to previous troop increases, such as an injection of 21,000 troops in the spring, and say they have failed to quell the insurgency.

"If new troops come and are stationed in civilian areas, when they draw Taliban attacks civilians will end up being killed," said Gulbadshah Majidi, a lawmaker and close associate of Mr. Karzai. "This will only increase the distance between Afghans and their government."

In the volatile southern city of Kandahar, where many of the new troops are expected to head, locals said they will be glued to their radio sets on Wednesday morning to hear news of Mr. Obama's new strategy.

"If we get more troops, there will be more bloodshed," said Noor Muhammad, a shopkeeper. "Only Afghans themselves can solve this problem."

U.S. authorities contend that Afghan government officials who disapprove of the troop increase are apportioning blame to deflect attention from their own shortcomings. "It's poor governance more than anything else that has put us in this situation," said a Kabul-based U.S. official.

U.S. authorities said that they are working to minimize civilian casualties and that a military thrust to push back the Taliban is necessary to bring needed political and economic change.

Moreover, they say that the alternative espoused by opponents to the troop increase -- concentration on the development of the Afghan forces -- is premature. "It could take some years before the Afghan security forces are able to stand on their own," said Capt. Bill Spurlock, who is involved in overseeing the training of Afghan army recruits.

The Afghan army has made many strides, but is plagued by lack of experience and illiteracy. The Afghan police force is even less capable and is widely accused of corruption and inefficiency. On Sunday, a police officer opened fire on his comrades, killing six and wounding two. The incident came less than a month after a police officer killed five British soldiers in a similar attack.

U.S. funding and support will be needed for a significant expansion of Afghan security forces. Officials in Washington said an expansion of Afghan forces is unlikely until the government and security sector improve. A U.S. troop increase could provide the space and support needed for the Afghan forces to develop, U.S. officials said.

—Habib Zahori contributed to this article.