When Air Force planes conducted an airstrike that killed Taliban commander Mullah Abdul Salam in Kunduz province Feb. 26, a joint operation with Afghan security forces, it marked the first salvo in a renewed strategy by U.S. forces to remove Taliban commanders from the battlefield.



"Mullah Salam and the Taliban fighters under him murdered and terrorized the people of Kunduz for too long," said Gen. John Nicholson, commander of U.S. Forces-Afghanistan. "Salam's death is an opportunity for change. The people of Afghanistan want peace and the government of Afghanistan is committed to achieving peace through reconciliation. The Taliban know the only path forward is reconciliation."



But, as noted by the Foundation for Defense of Democracies's Long War Journal, any talk of reconciliation was quickly countered by a spokesman for the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan on the group's website:



"The Islamic Emirate — as a representative of the Mujahid Afghan nation and martyrdom-loving people of Kunduz — in response to the irrational comments of General Nicholson declares that you do not have the capacity to talk to the Mujahideen because you are invaders and you understand well that the valiant Afghan nation has always treated invaders such that their brains are first put in order then forced them out of their country in humiliation."



The city of Kunduz, home to roughly 400,000 people, has become a microcosm of America's struggle to stabilize Afghanistan.



Twice in the past two years the northern Afghan city has fallen to Taliban militants, in part due to corrupt politics and failed policies. Afghan security forces and their American counterparts have yet to tame the city, casting shadow on Washington's continued claim that government forces can maintain control of the country's urban centers.



Kunduz province has also been the scene of two tragically errant U.S. airstrikes that killed scores of civilians, severely undercutting America's efforts to safeguard innocent lives and build support around the central government in Kabul.



In October 2015, after Taliban militants led by Mullah Salam overran Kunduz, Afghan security forces with embedded U.S. special operators called in multiple airstrikes from an AC-130 gunship on a Doctors Without Borders medical facility, killing nearly 42 civilians.



Then, in November 2016, shortly after the second collapse of the city's defenses, U.S. forces assisting Afghan troops in an operation to capture Taliban commanders in the village of Boz came under heavy fire. They called in airstrikes, which resulted in 33 civilian deaths.



