Attacks expose weakness of key Afghanistan supply route

KABUL (AFP) — Two sophisticated Taliban raids on NATO trucks in Pakistan have exposed the dangerous vulnerability of the vital supply route for international troops in Afghanistan through the legendary Khyber Pass.

Hundreds of vehicles were destroyed in two daring and well-planned attacks on terminals in northwest Pakistan -- at a time the United States is preparing to almost double the size of its force in landlocked Afghanistan.

The bulk of the supplies and equipment required by NATO and US-led forces battling the Taliban insurgency is shipped to Pakistan's largest port, Karachi in the south.

From there, the containers of food, fuel, vehicles and munitions are taken by truck to the city of Peshawar before being transported through Pakistan's restive tribal areas to Afghanistan via the Khyber pass.

It makes the famous 50-kilometre (30-mile) mountain pass -- used since the time of Alexander the Great -- indispensable to international forces.

But the road passes through the heart of Pakistan's tribal zone, a hideout for militants since the ousting of Afghanistan's Taliban regime at the end of 2001.

NATO and the US-led force said they expected Pakistan to increase security after hundreds of militants armed with rocket launchers and automatic weapons attacked the terminals, overpowering their guards and destroying vehicles and supplies.

The two forces do not have direct control over supplies as they go through Pakistan, making them a soft target for Taliban militants seeking to disrupt the military campaign.

"Until the trucks enter Afghanistan, they are the responsibility of the transport companies, and in terms of security, of the Pakistani military authorities," said General Richard Blanchette, spokesman for NATO's International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.

"We have very fruitful exchanges of information with the Pakistani military authorities, and a higher degree of cooperation than ever before, which is very encouraging."

Blanchette played down the impact of the attacks, which he said had no effect on operations in Afghanistan.

"We have always had sufficient resources and robust supply lines," he said.

But plans by the United States to nearly double the size of its 32,000-strong force in Afghanistan next year will mean a surge in heavy equipment and more fuel and other supplies to sustain the enlarged force.

Already, the US-led force says it brings in 2,000 truckloads of supplies every month, between 75 and 80 percent of them through Pakistan.

Colonel Greg Julian, a spokesman for US forces in Afghanistan, said he expected Pakistan's military to increase security, with the force heavily dependent on the Khyber pass route.

"Seventy percent of our supplies come from Pakistan, via the Khyber pass," Julian said, adding the remaining 30 percent was brought in by air or other roads.

Flying in supplies is very expensive and does not allow large amounts of equipment to be brought in at once, while the main other land route through Pakistan, from Karachi to Quetta and on to Kandahar city, runs through a Taliban stronghold.

Alternatives to Pakistan are limited. Afghanistan has a long border with Iran, but Tehran's hostile relations with the United States rule that option out.

On the other side, the former Soviet states of Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan are heavily influenced by Moscow.

Relations between Moscow and NATO were sourged by the Georgian conflict in August but in November, Germany secured permission to transport military goods through Russia to Afghanistan.