KABUL, Afghanistan — Two NATO soldiers were killed Wednesday when men wearing uniforms of the Afghan security forces opened fire at an Afghan military base in the southern province of Helmand, the American-led international coalition said in a statement.

In other news highlighting the province’s precarious security, the strategic district of Musa Qala fell to the Taliban on Wednesday after fighting that lasted all night, members of the provincial council said. Officials had warned that if Musa Qala fell, the Taliban could tighten their grip on northern Helmand.

The nationalities of the NATO soldiers were not immediately clear. The statement released by the American-led coalition said the service members died when two men wearing Afghan uniforms opened fire on their vehicle. The attackers were killed when coalition forces returned fire, the statement said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: Asia Edition Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the Asian morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

However, Afghan officials in Helmand said that the two NATO soldiers were part of a group of Americans. The officials said that the soldiers had been fired on by Afghan troops who suspected them of being Taliban fighters in army uniforms.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The guards on duty asked them for identification, but the American Special Forces seem to have ignored their warning,” said the head of the provincial council’s security committee, Bashir Ahmad Shakir. A representative for the international coalition in Afghanistan declined to comment.