The Post takes a comprehensive year-by-year look at Canada's presence in Afghanistan since 2001.Two jetliners crash into the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, and a third plane flies into the Pentagon in Virginia. Canada responds to the attacks that killed more than 3,000 people, by launching “Operation Support,” an initiative that reroutes civilian aircraft to Canadian airports, makes Canadian intelligence available to the U.S., and makes military and humanitarian preparations in case of another attack. The next day, the NATO North Atlantic Council determines that the events of 9/11 constitute an armed attack against all parties of the North Atlantic Treaty, and decides that the United States and its allies have the right to respond with the use of armed force.U.S. President George W. Bush, announces the “War on Terror”, reiterating that Osama bin Laden is the suspected mastermind behind the attacks. Canadian Minister of National Defence, Art Eggleton, says that the more than 100 Canadian Forces members serving in exchange postings abroad have been authorized to participate in operations in response to the attacks. National Post in Afghanistan: In Peshawar, Pakistan, the Post's Patrick Graham talks to a former ally of bin Laden's about the terrorist leader's countless caves.Shortly before crossing into Afghanistan, National Post foreign correspondent Patrick Graham filed this report from Mach Mountain, Pakistan, a route long favoured by arms smugglers. On his journey he meets "the Prince," a high-altitude weapons impresario who laughs at death. Read the full story. President Bush launches “Operation Enduring Freedom,” a UN-sanctioned coalition against the Taliban and al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. Three days later, he asks Canada to join the multinational military coalition when he meets with Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien.The U.S. and Britain launch an air assault on Afghanistan which the Taliban refers to as an “attack on Islam.” Meanwhile, Mr. Chrétien announces “Operation Apollo,” officially pledging air, sea and land support for the international campaign against terror. “I have made clear in the days since Sept. 11 that the struggle to defeat the forces of terrorism will be a long one. We must remain strong and vigilant,” Mr. Chrétien said. “I cannot promise that the campaign against terrorism will be painless, but I can promise that it will be won.” The next day, Defence Minister Art Eggleton commits 2,000 members of the Canadian Forces to “Operation Apollo,” which is set to conclude in two years. Certain elements of Joint Task Force Two – the Special Operations Forces unit tasked with a broad range of missions including counter-terrorism operations – deploy for an initial six months, but this is not revealed at the time.Once again, Canadian soldiers, sailors and pilots will be marching as to war, as Pierre Berton, the popular Canadian historian, puts it in the title of his most recent book. Read the full editorial. Caught between the Taliban and mountains, displaced Afghans have nowhere to go. Patrick Graham reports from Aabpar. Read the full story. The Taliban government in Kabul falls to the Northern Alliance.Mr. Eggleton announces that Canadian ground troops will be in Afghanistan for a maximum of six months. “If we had to rotate [troops] for years, then that would become a problem. But we are not planning on that being a requirement,” Mr. Eggleton said. “It is not an offensive mission, not a front-line mission. This is a stabilization mission to assist in opening corridors for humanitarian assistance.”Prime Minister Jean Chretien's admission that Canadian ground troops will not be sent to Afghanistan if their deployment entails fighting casts serious doubt -- to put it at its mildest -- about his government's commitment to waging liberal democracy's war against terrorism.At the Bonn Conference, Germany, participants in the UN talks on Afghanistan establish the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to “assist the Afghan government in the establishment of a secure and stable government.” As well, Afghan opposition leaders set up the Afghan Transitional Authority and choose Hamid Karzai as the interim leader.Osama bin Laden evades capture after a standoff with coalition forces in the Afghan mountains and a series of aerial attacks executed by the U.S. in the Tora Bora region of Afghanistan.If Canada is not asked to provide anything in Afghanistan, it is likely because Ottawa has warned the UN or the British not to ask. Read the full editorial.