Afghanistan Sun - Wednesday 6th August, 2014

First insider attack in months in Afghanistan kills first U.S. general in wars since 1970

German brigadier general and eight Americans were among 15 wounded

Karzai condemns the 'cowardly' attack

KABUL, Afghanistan - In a major military setback to the United States in Afghanistan, an American major general was killed Tuesday in an attack by an alleged Afghan soldier at an army training academy on the outskirts of Kabul, a coalition force official said.

The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to speak to the media, said a man dressed in an Afghan army uniform opened fire on foreign troops at Marshal Fahim National Defense University, a traiing academy near Camp Qargha, a base west of Kabul.

The official said that about 15 people, including a German brigadier general and "a dozen" Americans, were injured in the insider attack.

The International Security Assistance Force, the formal name of the NATO-led coalition in Afghanistan, said the incident had involved "local Afghan and ISAF troops".

It said there were "fatalities" after the "shooting incident". But the ISAF could not confirm the number of victims or their nationalities.

The U.S. military later revealed the general killed was the Deputy Commanding General of the Combined Security Transition Command in Afghanistan, Maj. Gen. Harold J. Greene. He was the first general killed in foreign wars in forty four years, and the highest ranking officer to die in foreign wars in 42 years.

General Mohammmad Zahir Azimi, a spokesman for Afghanistan's Defense Ministry, said the gunman in an Afghan military uniform was shot dead. He was aged in his 20s. It is believed he was a member of the Afghan forces stationed at the academy.

The official said that the death toll is feared to mount given the severity of injuries of troops.

The German officer wounded was identified as Brig. Gen. Michael Bartscher, 56, an adviser to the Ministerial Advisory Group, which advises the Afghan defense ministry. He was rushed to the German field hospital at Mazar-e-Sharif.

The defense ministry in Afghanistan in a statement said that a "few people were wounded" in the shooting, and that they had been immediately evacuated to a hospital.It was later confirmed the number of wounded was 15, eight of which were American military personnel.

The statement said the attacker was "wearing an Afghan National Army uniform".

Afghan officials, who again spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the shooter was an Afghan soldier.

Germany's military confirmed in a statement that 15 troops had been wounded in the attack, including a German brigadier general.

Germany's Der Spiegel reported that a two star US general was killed.

There have been many instances in the past where Afghan soldiers have killed foreign troops in the war-torn country.

Such attacks at one point posed a serious challenge to the war on terror in Afghanistan, sowing distrust and threatening to upend the American-led training mission that is vital to the long-term strategy for keeping the Taliban at bay.

Afghan President Hamid Karzai condemned the "cowardly" attack.

It is "an act by the enemies who don't want to see Afghanistan have strong institutions," Karzai said in a statement.

Officials however dismissed the notion the incident would impact on U.S. or European involvement in Afghanistan. "The number of insider attacks over the past year or so has diminished quite significantly," Ambassador Maurits Jochems, the Dutch diplomat who is NATO's senior civilian representative in Afghanistan, told journalists in Kabul.