Taliban massacres outlined for UN

The reports, written by United Nations personnel in Afghanistan, say such mass killings were ordered or approved by Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar.

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Fighters and commanders of Afghanistan's Taliban militia committed systematic massacres in recent years while trying to consolidate control over northern and western Afghanistan, according to confidential UN documents made available to Newsday.

UN officials who investigated the killings of at least 178 people in January in the Yakaolang district of north-central Afghanistan said they had found witnesses to radio conversations between Omar and Taliban troops who conducted the massacres.

At Yakaolang, as in other such massacres, the Taliban, ethnic Pashtuns of the Sunni sect of Islam, particularly targeted ethnic Hazaras, who belong to the Shiite sect.

"These are the same type of war crimes as were committed in Bosnia" and should be prosecuted in international courts, said a UN official.

UN staffers said they made the reports available out of frustration that top levels of the UN structure have done too little to have the atrocities designated war crimes.

When the first accounts of the Yakaolang killings trickled out of Afghanistan, the Taliban vigorously denied them. But in April, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan noted to the Security Council that accounts of the killings "warrant a more thorough investigation."

UN staffers in Afghanistan collected witness accounts of the massacres, visited mass graves of the victims and, in July, wrote a detailed 55-page report that they said was sent to Annan's office and to that of UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson.

Spokesmen for Annan and Robinson said Thursday that the UN investigation has been stymied by the Taliban.

UN staffers have collected accounts of each massacre, including names of many of those who conducted them and those killed. They note the roles played by Pakistanis and fighters with Osama bin Laden's Al Qaeda organization.

Based on details from hundreds of people who survived or who witnessed the massacres, as well as forensic work on grave sites, the report was written to provide the basis for a prosecution of Taliban leaders for crimes against humanity.

In 1998, when the Taliban captured the northern city of Mazar-e Sharif, they massacred hundreds of residents, "often shooting Hazaras in the street," according to Human Rights Watch. That massacre was seen as reprisal for a 1997 massacre by Hazaras of an estimated 2,000 surrendered Taliban fighters.

Other massacres reportedly took place in the villages of Bedmushkin and in Nayak. On Jan. 6 in Nayak, the report said, Taliban fighters in eight pickups entered the village. Over the next five hours, "the Taliban search party rounded up all of the males they could find." Taliban fighters eventually "shot them in firing squads."