Defence Policy and Business

Approximately 1,400 additional UK troops are to deploy to southern Afghanistan at NATO's request, Defence Secretary Des Browne announced today, 26 February 2007.

The UK will provide a manoeuvre battalion for Regional Command (South), an area which covers Helmand, the base and responsibility of the existing UK taskforce, but also the strategically vital neighbouring province of Kandahar, plus the further provinces of Oruzgan, Zabol, Nimruz and Daykondi.

"We believe every NATO partner should be prepared to do more to meet this need. But we must be realistic. I have lobbied our partners consistently for more help but it is increasingly obvious that at present, when it comes to the most challenging parts of Afghanistan, only we and a small number of key allies are prepared to step forward."

"I have said repeatedly that there is no purely military solution to Afghanistan's problems. But unless we can help bring security to all its people, and convince them that the elected government, with our support, will defeat the Taliban, then everything else they and we have achieved in Afghanistan will remain at risk. That is a risk we cannot afford to take – for the sake of Afghanistan and the sake of our own security."

Mr Browne continued:

"I want to take the opportunity to say again on behalf of the Government how much we admire the professionalism, skill and bravery with which our Armed Forces do the hard and dangerous work we ask of them. Ensuring they have the support and equipment they need remains my highest priority. I am well aware of how much we are asking them to do but I also want to make clear that we would not make this decision to commit extra forces unless it was in accordance with unequivocal military advice. I and the Chiefs of Staff agree that this additional commitment is manageable."

UK troops and other ISAF forces have taken the fight to the Taliban in southern Afghanistan over the winter months, and have tactically defeated them again and again.

Despite the challenging security environment the UK-led Provincial Reconstruction Team in Helmand has started implementing over 100 Quick Impact Projects to improve the lives of ordinary Afghans. Recent projects include the construction of windmill-powered wells and schools; water infrastructure works; and emergency food distribution.



This extra deployment will enable UK forces to reinforce this progress and spread security further across the province – creating the space for development and improved basic services to make a difference to the lives of ordinary Afghans.

The Chief of the Defence Staff, Air Chief Marshal Sir Jock Stirrup, said:

"I am of course acutely aware that all our Armed Forces continue to operate at a high operational tempo and of the burden this places on them and their families. But the announced increase is necessary if we are to build on what has already been achieved. "When set against the changes recently announced to our deployed forces in Iraq, along with some reductions in other theatres, the Service Chiefs of Staff and I judge that we can make this enhancement in Afghanistan while still reducing slightly the overall level of commitment. Nevertheless, the stretch on our people and structures will continue. It is a testament to our people that they continue to operate so effectively at such a high level."

Mr Speaker, on the 1st of February I announced the forthcoming rotation of our troops in Afghanistan. At that time I undertook, once I had spoken with my fellow NATO Defence Ministers at Seville, to update the House on any further changes to our force structure. That is what I am here to do today.

First, however, I want to highlight the progress and achievements in Afghanistan during 2006. NATO has continued its expansion of responsibility for this vital campaign, into the more challenging South and East of the country. We have faced down the Taliban in their own backyard, delivering security and bringing the reach of the Afghan Government to places that have hardly seen it before. We have unified the military mission under the leadership of General Richards and the British-led Allied Rapid Reaction Corps. Across Afghanistan we have built schools, mosques, roads, wells, and markets. We have defended and reinforced 5 years of progress including the first elections in decades, remarkable improvements in education, and the return of 5 million refugees. I say this because before we talk about what more we must do, we should understand what is at risk, if we do not continue to live up to the collective commitment we have made to Afghanistan and its people. I am not here to herald this as a job done. I am not painting a glossy picture; our mission in Afghanistan faces serious challenges and the country faces serious problems. But I am here to explain why we must keep working to meet these challenges and secure Afghanistan’s future.

Mr Speaker, I have said many times from this despatch box that there is no purely military solution to Afghanistan’s problems. What military forces can do, as has been shown right across the country, is increase security. But unless we can help the Afghan Government bring security to all its people, and convince them that they and NATO are going to defeat the Taliban and others who try to block or destroy progress, then everything else we have achieved in Afghanistan will remain at risk. At Seville, NATO’s senior military commander, SACEUR, reminded NATO members that it is the South and East where the security challenge is most acute. He identified a further need for robust, flexible, manoeuvrable combat forces to strengthen NATO commanders’ ability to tackle that challenge across these regions.

We believe every NATO partner should be prepared to do more to meet this need. At Seville, some announced they would do so. America promised an additional 3,000 troops. France has offered more Close Air Support. Germany has pledged six reconnaissance Tornadoes. Lithuania has pledged additional troops. All these contributions are welcome. They build on earlier commitments made at Riga in the autumn, principally by Poland who committed a battalion to the East. But we must be realistic about how many nations have the ability to take on the tasks facing NATO in the South and the East. I have lobbied our partners consistently for more help in these regions and I will continue to do so. But it is increasingly clear that at present, when it comes to the most demanding tasks in the more challenging parts of Afghanistan, only we and a small number of key allies are prepared to step forward.

Mr Speaker, this is why we have decided to commit additional forces to Afghanistan. Put simply, the alternative is unacceptable – it would place too great a risk on the progress we have made so far. This is a risk we simply cannot afford to take, both for the sake of Afghanistan, and for the sake of our own security. We may be shouldering a greater share of the burden than we might like, but so are others – and we do so in the knowledge that this is a vital mission and one which is directly in our national interest.

Mr Speaker, I turn now to the details of what this decision means in practice. The UK has decided to fill one of SACEUR’s most pressing requirements – a manoeuvre battalion for Regional Command (South), an area which covers Helmand, the base and responsibility of the existing UK taskforce, but also the strategically vital neighbouring province of Kandahar, plus the further provinces of Oruzgan, Zabol, Nimruz and Daykondi. We propose to deploy a battlegroup, comprising elements of an infantry battalion, the 1st Battalion the Royal Welsh (The Royal Welch Fusiliers), which will be augmented with a company of WARRIOR Infantry Fighting Vehicles from 1st Battalion Scots Guards. It will include additional artillery, including a regimental HQ and a battery of light guns from 19th Regiment Royal Artillery, a Brigade Surveillance Group drawn from 5th Regiment Royal Artillery, and a troop of Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems from 39th Regiment Royal Artillery. We shall also deploy additional reconnaissance and surveillance capabilities, four more HARRIER GR9s to provide Close Air Support, four SEA KING helicopters from 846 Naval Air Squadron to increase our Support Helicopter capacity and another C-130 HERCULES. Some of the forces deployed will be Reservists, although I am not yet in a position to inform the House of how many – I will write to confirm this.

In terms of overall numbers, this adds up to nearly 1,400 additional personnel. Some will deploy from the roulement in May but the majority will deploy over the course of the summer. They will be based mostly in Helmand, with some at Kandahar Airfield, although they will provide NATO commanders in RC-South with a flexible capability for use across the Southern region. In total, our forces in Afghanistan will increase from around 6,300 to settle at about 7,700 personnel. The current planning assumption remains that these forces are committed until 2009.

I am well aware of the pressure that this will continue to put our Armed Forces under. I have made clear in the past that this Government clearly recognises how much we are asking of them. I want to take the opportunity to say again on behalf of the Government how much we admire the professionalism, skill and bravery with which they do the hard and dangerous work we ask of them. I repeat that ensuring they have the support and equipment they need remains my highest priority. But I also want to make clear that we would not make this decision to commit extra forces unless it was in accordance with unequivocal military advice. I and the Chiefs of Staff agree that this additional commitment is manageable.

Mr Speaker, before closing I want to address some misconceptions about this decision which have circulated over recent days. The first is that our recent decisions on Iraq were driven by our desire to do more in Afghanistan. This gets things the wrong way around. Our planned drawdown in Iraq, announced by My Rt. Hon. Friend, the Prime Minister last week, is driven by the conditions on the ground. It is the situation in Iraq that determines what we do there, not the situation in Afghanistan. But of course our plans for Iraq and for other operational theatres, including the Balkans, affect our ability to do more in support of NATO in Afghanistan – and in that context, our decision last week on Iraq makes today’s decision that much easier.

The second misconception is that this enhancement reflects poor planning in the first place. This is simply not true. As a general point, it is wrong to suggest that any enhancement must reflect poor planning – inevitably much is learned during a deployment, especially in the early stages, and the force structure should adapt. This is what happened last summer. But in relation to today’s decision, it is a straightforward error to interpret this as implying anything about the adequacy of the Helmand Task force. That Force is clearly up to the job: it overmatched the Taliban in every engagement last summer, and over the winter it has been able to take the fight to the Taliban on our terms, while at the same time securing the area around the provincial capital, and also securing vital reconstruction projects like the Kajaki Dam. Today’s decision is a commitment to the Southern region as a whole. These additional forces will meet NATO’s requirement for troops who can work across the region, in Kandahar and elsewhere. They provide commanders with greater flexibility, and greater capacity to support the Afghan military while they develop the skills and confidence to do this vital work for themselves – which remains, as I have said before, our long-term exit strategy.



I can assure the House that in announcing this significant additional commitment, my resolve to secure contributions from others to share this burden remains undiminished. But I put it to the House that we must protect the progress we have made so far, and protect the Afghans’ own hope and determination. That is this Government’s intention. We believe in this mission, we believe in the International Community’s aims in Afghanistan, and we are proud to play our full part in achieving them.