WASHINGTON - Afghan National Army soldiers with cell phones can't always be trusted before a combat operation. They might phone home - or tip off the Taliban for 30 bucks.

That's among the challenges confronting U.S. trainers, who President Obama hopes can somehow whip the ragtag, drug-addled Afghan military and police into shape by mid-2011 so U.S. forces can begin to leave.

"We had to remove all their cell phones hours before a mission for fear that the operation would be compromised," recalled a senior U.S. military officer who has served three tours in Afghanistan training its army.

"It was hard to know if their loyalties fell with us and their unit or the folks in the village we were getting ready to visit," he added.

In his West Point speech Dec. 1, Obama said his goal is to shorten the war by adding 30,000 additional U.S. forces. While they clobber the enemy,other GIs will train the ANA - now numbering 90,000 in a nation of 27 million - to take over what's left of the fight in Taliban-infested areas.

Training the Afghans how to shoot and move is the easy part.

A typical Afghan soldier can easily beat an American triathlete up a steep hill. "They're like mountain goats," said the officer.

"You don't need to train an Afghan soldier to fight," agreed journalist and ex-NATO top adviser Robert Young Pelton. The real trick is convincing him "not to use his body armor plate to cook his dinner."

Afghan troops are also notorious for "using their rifle butts to ask questions," or simply selling their AK-47s and U.S.-issued M-16s, Pelton said.

He also witnessed Afghan troops being trained to hand out trinkets to village kids for information - only to see them smacking kids with their rifle butts for stealing the same trinkets.

Keeping them on the team, moreover, is tough as hell.

Drug use, corruption and the dearth of Pashtun tribesmen in an army led by ethnic Tajiks plague the force, who mostly fight in Pashtun tribal areas.

The official ANA Website acknowledges other issues.

"The problems of desertion and difficult recruitment are recurring problems," it states. The ANA site also boasts of a border shootout with Pakistani troops - who are supposed to be allies.

The Pentagon puts the desertion rate at up to 25% for an army which for years has paid lower salaries than their enemy, which is funded by opium profits and oil-rich Arab donors.

Lt. Gen. William B. Caldwell IV, who oversees training of Afghans, said last week that recruit pay for high-combat areas was recently boosted from $180 to $240 a month, and enlistments are way up.

Raises and promotions over time could close the rest of the pay gap with Taliban fighters, who earn $250- $300 a month, he said.

But the brain drain is another problem. The most competent are often recruited into the tiny Afghan Commandos, militias hired at triple the ANA pay rate by Green Berets, or elite, CIA-run Afghan Counter-Terrorist Pursuit Teams.

"In the places that are most contested by the Taliban, recruiting and retention obviously struggle or is hindered," a senior Obama adviser conceded last week.

There's still another heartbreaking reality top brass prefer to avoid discussing: Afghan troops killing the very U.S. and NATO trainers trying to help them.

Seven British and U.S. advisers have been slain since last April.

jmeek@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!