By Terri Moon Cronk DoD News, Defense Media Activity

Afghan tactical air controllers call in an airstrike at a training range near Kabul, Afghanistan, March 27, 2016, while a Czech Republic air advisor assists from the rear The Afghan army and air force coordinated live-fire training for A-29 Super Tucano and MD-530 Jengi attack aircraft. The tactical air controllers coordinate requests for air-casualty evacuation, close air support, aerial resupply and airlift. They also deconflict air-to-ground fires from ground-to-ground fires for Afghan army operations. Air Force photo by Capt. Eydie Sakura

Unilateral U.S. efforts and a spring offensive by Afghan forces have significantly decreased the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant’s footprint in Afghanistan, the NATO-led Resolute Support mission’s deputy chief of staff for communications told Pentagon reporters today.

Speaking by teleconference from the Afghan capital of Kabul, Army Brig. Gen. Charles H. Cleveland said U.S. Forces Afghanistan continues its authorized mission to disrupt, dismantle and defeat al-Qaida, and noted the unilateral counterterrorism mission also was extended to ISIL in January 2015 after that terror organization raised its flag in the country.

But the battle for control has changed as ISIL is pushed back, he said.

“Our overall view now is we are having an effect [by] putting pressure on [ISIL], specifically in Nangarhar,” Cleveland said. One indicator is ISIL appears to exist in two or three districts today, compared to six to eight districts three months ago, he said.

ISIL Forces Moving in Effort to Survive

Additionally, ISIL fighters are trying to move into Kunar and Nuristan provinces or farther south into Ghazni, Cleveland added.

“We don’t think they’re moving because they’re able to expand or they have additional capacity,” he said. “We think they’re trying to survive. They’re under pressure, and are trying to escape from the areas where we’ve aggressively targeted them.”

Another indication of ISIL’s decreasing numbers in Afghanistan is the number of fighters who are defecting, Cleveland said. “They’re either laying down their arms and coming back to the government or trying to get back into the Taliban,” he added.

Partnering With Afghan Forces

Cleveland updated reporters on the mission to train, advise and assist Afghan national defense and security forces on numerous levels in the effort. “Specifically, we partner with them at the tactical level, and particularly with their special operations forces,” he said.

During a 36-hour mission last week involving unilateral U.S. strikes against ISIL targets, Afghan special operations forces were able to move into the Kot district in Nangarhar province and clear part of a valley, Cleveland pointed out.

“It’s a partnership as we move forward on all of these counterterrorism operations,” the general said.

Three weeks into their spring offensive, has Afghan forces have transitioned from last year’s defensive to an offensive one in 2016, Cleveland said. “They’re trying to take the fight to the enemy,” he said. “We’ve already seen evidence of them in northeastern Kunduz, engaging the Taliban there.”

Afghan forces also have begun re-establishing their presence in Helmand province with an offensive approach, particularly where they are trying to clear territory in the east, Cleveland said.

(Follow Terri Moon Cronk on Twitter: @MoonCronkDoD)