MH370 possibly in one of two ‘corridors’, says PM

Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak (centre) said today that the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 may be between two possible corridors that span from Kazakhstan to Thailand in one and Indonesia to the south of the Indian Ocean in the other. ― Picture by Saw Siow Feng SEPANG, March 15 ― Missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 is in two possible corridors that span from Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan to Thailand in one and Indonesia to the south of the Indian Ocean in the other, Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak revealed today.

The prime minister said new information showed that while the transponders and Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) were turned off shortly into the flight, MH370 made a final satellite communication at 8.11am on March 8, nearly eight hours after it departed Kuala Lumpur International Airport.

“Based on this new data, the aviation authorities of Malaysia and their international counterparts have determined that the plane’s last communication with the satellite was in one of two possible corridors,” Najib said at a press conference at the Sama-Sama Hotel here today.

The first was a northern corridor stretching from the borders of Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan to northern Thailand, with a second southern corridor ranging from Indonesia to the south of the Indian Ocean.

“Investigators are working to further refine the data to locate the aircraft,” he said.

Earlier, the prime minister confirmed the plane with 239 onboard was taken off course through “deliberate action”, but maintained that a hijacking was only one of the possibilities still being pursued.

In the Gallery

A family member of a passenger onboard the missing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 reacts during a briefing from the Malaysia Airlines at a hotel in Beijing March 14, 2014. — Reuters pic



A member of the Malaysia Airlines’ special assistance team to help relatives of passengers from the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 leaves the lounge at a hotel in Beijing on March 15, 2014. — Picture by AFP



A monk lights candles during a special prayer for family members of passengers onboard the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 in a Buddhist temple in Subang Jaya March 15, 2014. ― Reuters pic



Messages expressing hope for family members of passengers onboard the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 are seen in a Buddhist temple in Subang Jaya outside Kuala Lumpur March 15, 2014. ― Reuters pic



Members of a rescue team keep track of a GPS system on a Basarnas rescue ship during a search and rescue operation to find the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370, in the Andaman Sea, March 15, 2014. ― Reuters pic



Prime Minister Datuk Seri Najib Razak holds a press conference at Sama Sama Hotel, Kuala Lumpur International Airport (KLIA), March 15, 2014. ― Picture by Saw Siow Feng



A women cries during a special prayer session for the family members of passengers on-board the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 in a Buddhist temple in Subang Jaya, March 15, 2014. ― Reuters pic



Family members of passengers aboard the missing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 react as they watch a telecast of Malaysia’s Prime Minister Najib Razak news conference at a hotel in Beijing, March 15, 2014. ― Reuters pic



Family members of passengers aboard the missing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 check news on a mobile phone at a hotel in Beijing, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



A girl looks at a board with messages of support and hope for passengers of the missing Malaysia Airlines MH370 at the Kuala Lumpur International Airport, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



Members of a Malaysia Airlines special assistance team watch as the news conference on the missing flight MH370 is streamed on a projector screen at a hotel in Beijing, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



A family member shouts at Malaysia Airlines Commercial Director Hugh Dunleavy (top, back-facing camera) after his question was declined, at a hotel in Beijing, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



A Japan Coast Guard studies a map with two Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency pilots as they search for the missing Malaysia Airlines MH370 plane over the waters of the South China Sea, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



Japan Coast Guard personnel prepare their Gulfstream V Jet aircraft customised for search and rescue operations, to search for the missing Malaysia Airlines MH370 plane over the waters of the South China Sea, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



A woman writes a message expressing hope for the family members of passengers on-board the missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 in a Buddhist temple in Kuala Lumpur, March 15, 2014. — Reuters pic



An Indonesian student displays a message expressing prayers and well-wishes for passengers of the missing Malaysia Airlines (MAS) flight MH370, in Medan, North Sumatra on March 15, 2014. — AFP pic



Indonesian national search and rescue agency personnel watch over high seas during a search operation for missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 in the Andaman Sea on March 15, 2014. — AFP pic

With the latest information, Najib said the search effort in the South China Sea will now be called off and the assets re-deployed after consulting with data and assisting nations.

“This new satellite information has a significant impact on the nature and scope of the search operation.

“We are ending our operations in the South China Sea and reassessing the redeployment of our assets,” Najib said.

The waters between Malaysia and China was where the bulk of search efforts have been concentrated, given previous information that MH370 lost contact with ground control 120km off Kelantan’s coast.

The area was also the site of the most sightings of “debris” and oil slicks thought to be from MH370 but all later turned out to be false alarms.