The airliner had been traveling on an overnight flight from Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital, to Beijing with 239 passengers and crew on board but inexplicably turned off course and headed south. No debris has been found.

Transmissions from Flight 370, known as electronic handshakes, and an unsuccessful satellite phone call between Malaysia Airlines ground staff and the jet have allowed the Australian authorities leading the search to chart a narrow trajectory that the plane probably traveled.

“The complexities surrounding the search cannot be understated,” the Transport Safety Bureau said in a recent search update. “It involves vast areas of the Indian Ocean with only limited known data and aircraft flight information.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But officials have said they remain cautiously optimistic that they will find the jet. They hope the next phase of the search, using side-scan sonar, synthetic aperture sonar, multibeam echo sounders and video cameras, will detect the plane’s wreckage on the seafloor.

The first phase of the search, an air and water-surface search that involved hundreds of surveillance flights covering about 1.7 million square miles, lasted 52 days. Searchers then used towed and autonomous listening devices in the hope of detecting “pings” from the plane’s data recorders. But no signals were detected, and no wreckage found.

Bathymetric surveys of the area’s ocean floor use a rainbow of colors to depict how the seabed rises from a golden-hued plateau on the northern edge of the Broken Ridge — an underwater volcanic plateau — and then drops into a ravine that could be more than four miles deep.

The new phase of the search involves towing sonar equipment that can detect wreckage miles underwater, but that search will be slow given the terrain. Some of the sonar operates best when towed around 650 feet from the seafloor. “And it may be towed on cable six miles long out the back of a vessel,” Dr. Duncan said. “You can’t be flying blind using that sort of equipment. That’s where the detailed maps come in.”

Dr. Duncan said an enormous amount of effort had gone into refining “what is essentially scant data in the plane’s last flying hours.”

“There are uncertainties associated with that,” he said. “They are searching the area of highest probability. And if it is there, they will find it.”