Malaysia’s prime minister, Najib Razak, said a “holistic restructuring plan” would be announced by the end of the month.

“This process of renewal will involve painful steps and sacrifices from all parties,” he said in a statement that mentioned the need for support from, among others, the airline’s creditors, raising the possibility of a debt write-down.

The airline’s managers were sharply criticized for their handling of the disappearance in March of Flight 370, a Boeing 777-200 that was flying from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to Beijing with 239 people on board. The fate of that plane remains a mystery, and a search for clues continues in the southern Indian Ocean.

Last month, Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down over Ukraine, killing all 298 people on board. The plane, a 777-200 flying from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur, was probably shot down by a missile fired by pro-Russian separatists, according to American intelligence analysts.

Both disasters aggravated what was already poor financial performance. The airline faces competition on its home turf from AirAsia, a privately owned low-cost airline that has grown rapidly since beginning operations more than a decade ago.

Malaysia Airlines’ response in recent years has been to sell discounted tickets as well as to add capacity, in part using Airbus A380 double-decker planes. The strategy did little to stem losses, and it backfired when bookings melted away after the disappearance of Flight 370.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The airline has already cut many of its money-losing long-range routes, including some flights to South America. But analysts said that the airline would have to drastically reduce the number of its destinations to survive. The airline serves 80 destinations worldwide.

Analysts said that earlier attempts to restructure the company did not go far enough because of union resistance or political interference. A 2011 plan to exchange shares with AirAsia and share expenses, for example, failed because labor groups opposed it.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Malaysia Airlines was already sleepwalking and ignoring the competitive threat from the low-cost market when AirAsia set up shop,” said Saj Ahmad, an analyst with StrategicAero Research in London.

“Given that Malaysia Airlines is government-owned, as is the sovereign wealth fund that is now looking to take on 100 percent ownership, the problem is that rebranding does nothing to stop customers from staying away from a tainted entity,” he said.

The government has ruled out bankruptcy in part because the country lacked bankruptcy laws equivalent to Chapter 11 in the United States, which has allowed American carriers to restructure their operations, cancel contracts or rewrite labor deals, according to a report by CAPA.

At this point, the airline is unlikely to generate much interest from foreign partners, including Etihad Airlines, once seen as a possible partner.

Khazanah Nasional Berhad, the investment arm of the Malaysian government, on Friday offered to take control of the company and to buy back shares at a price 12.5 percent higher than Thursday’s closing price, and it requested that the company be delisted from the Malaysian stock exchange.

Khazanah was vague about its immediate plans for the airline, saying only that it intended “to undertake a comprehensive review and restructuring” and that the airline had “substantial funding requirements.”

Malaysia Airlines, which made its first commercial flight as the national airline in 1947, during the British colonial period, was then called Malayan Airways. After independence, the government used the airline as a tool to raise the country’s profile in Asia and around the world. An image of a jet even appeared on local currency.

The share buyback, which would cost Khazanah about $431 million, would have to be approved by private shareholders, who own about 30 percent of the company. In a statement on Friday, Khazanah said the goal of the restructuring was to make the airline profitable but also for it to “serve its function as a critical national development entity.”