The government confirms that search and rescue efforts at both corridors have started for the missing MH370.

VIDEO INSIDE

SEPANG: The government today confirmed that search and rescue operations for the missing Malaysia Airlines MH370 in the northern and southern corridors have started.

“Countries including Malaysia, Australia, China, Indonesia and Kazakhstan have already initiated search and rescue operations.

“The Royal Malaysian Air Force and the Royal Malaysian Navy have deployed assets to the southern corridor. Two Malaysian ships have been deployed: the offshore patrol vessels KD Kelantan and KD Selangor. This deployment also includes a Super Lynx helicopter, which can operate from either ship.

“Australia has already moved a P-3 Orion aircraft to region of the Cocos and Christmas Islands. Today, the Prime Minister of Australia confirmed that Australia will send an additional two P-3 Orions and a C-130 Hercules.

[youtube]_tdvLmf8BRE[/youtube]

“A US P-8 Poseidon aircraft will be travelling to Perth today to help with the search,” Defence cum Acting Transport Minister Hishammuddin Tun Hussein told a daily press conference here today.

The Boeing 777-200EF aircraft went missing on March 8 on its flight from the Kuala Lumpur International Airport to Beijing. The Malaysia Airlines jetliner went missing one hour into the flight over the South China Sea.

Investigators have confirmed that the flights communications and transponders were disabled internally and the aircraft did a turn back soon after it disappeared from civilian radar.

The plane with 239 passengers and crew showed up on military radar one hour after it went missing on the western side of peninsular Malaysia.

The plane was heading towards the Andaman Sea when it was lost on military radar. Experts have confirmed that the plane flew for six hours after it lost contact with the military tracking system.

Following this new discovery, the authorities are now searching for the missing plane in two sectors – the northern corridor stretching from Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan to northern Thailand, and the southern corridor stretching from Indonesia to the southern Indian ocean.

Diplomatic notes

On diplomatic efforts taken by the Malaysian government, Hishammuddin said Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak had spoken to the Prime Minister of Australia and the Premier of China.

“Malaysia’s Foreign Ministry has sent diplomatic notes to all countries involved in the search and rescue operation. This includes two groups: first, countries in the search corridors; and second, countries from which we are seeking assistance and expertise.

“For countries in the search corridors, we are requesting radar and satellite information, as well as specific assets for the search and rescue operation. We are asking them to share their land, sea and aerial search and rescue action plans with the Rescue Co-ordination Centre here in Malaysia, so that we can co-ordinate the search effort.

“We have asked for regular updates, including daily reports on both search activities, and details of any information required from Malaysia.

“We are not at liberty to reveal information from specific countries. As the co-ordinating authority we are gathering all information as part of the on-going search and rescue operation,” said the minister.

He said over the past 48 hours, Malaysia has been working on the diplomatic, technical and logistical requirements of the search for MH370 and the number of countries involved in the search and rescue operation has increased to 26.

Not withholding information

He also confirmed that Malaysia had been cooperating with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Interpol and other relevant international law enforcement authorities.

He also brushed aside allegations that Malaysia was withholding information on the missing MH370.

“Our priority has always been to find the aircraft. We would not withhold any information that could help. But we also have a responsibility not to release information until it has been verified by the international investigations team.

“This responsibility is not only to the families and to the investigation, but also the search and rescue operation. It would be irresponsible to deploy substantial assets merely on the basis of unverified and uncorroborated information.

“Over the past two days, we have been re-calibrating the search for MH370. It remains a significant diplomatic, technical and logistical challenge. Malaysia is encouraged by the progress made during such a short period of time.

“We are grateful for the response by the heads of government that we have spoken to, all of whom have expressed a commitment of assistance. With support from our many international partners, this new phase of the search is underway.

“Assets are being deployed, and search and rescue operations have begun. I wish to thank our partners from around the world for their continued support,” he concluded.