Malaysian police have expanded an investigation into the missing Malaysia Airlines plane to include ground crew, caterers and the farmers who picked four tons of mangosteens - a tropical fruit - that were in the hold.

Despite failing to find any suspicious evidence about any of the passengers or crew, Khalid Abu Bakar, Malaysia's police chief, said he was confident the case would be solved. He said police traced the mangosteens - a tangy Asian fruit with leathery skin around juicy white flesh - to an orchard in the city of Muar and examined both the farmers and the Chinese importers.

"Imagine how many people we must interview to rule out sabotage - and that is just for mangosteens," he said. "We tracked down to who plucked the fruits, who packed and shipped them out, and who put them on the plane.

"Then, we had to see who was to receive them in China and who paid for it, and how much."

Police have cleared the 227 passengers on board the flight but are still investigating the 12 crew members. No leads have been revealed.

Authorities believe "someone on the plane" deliberately disabled the communications and turned the aircraft westward within an hour of taking off From Kuala Lumpur during a flight to Beijing on March 8.

Following criticism of Malaysia's handling of the probe, Mr Khalid said police were examining all aspects of the flight including the caterers, who were investigated to ensure the food served on the plane was not poisoned.

He said he had not yet received details of an FBI investigation into deleted files on a flight simulator which was seized from the home of Zaharie Ahmad Shah, the pilot.

The multinational search for the plane in the southern Indian Ocean shifted slightly north after further analysis of radar data and pings emitted by the aircraft. A source close to the investigation told The Telegraph that reassessment - which concluded the plane had flown faster and run out of fuel earlier than previously thought - was based on data from Malaysian military radar.

Najib Razak, Malaysia's prime minister, visited the operation's base near Perth to meet the search teams and described the effort as a "Herculean task".

"They told me of the difficulties of a search like this, of distance and weather and of maintaining morale over a long period," Mr Najib said.

"Until we find the plane, many families cannot start to grieve... But I can promise them that we will not give up."

Tony Abbott, Australia's prime minister, described the search as "the most difficult in human history" but warned there was no guarantee that the plane would be found.

"We cannot be certain of ultimate success in the search for MH370," he said. "But we can be certain that we will spare no effort - that we will not rest - until we have done everything we humanly can."

A British submarine has joined the search in an effort to find the black box before its pinger runs out of battery life, possibly within days.