When Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 disappeared on a clear Saturday night from radar screens, no one could explain how the Boeing 777 had seemingly vanished into thin air. Seven days later, there is far more confusion and misinformation circulating than solid evidence, and the aircraft with 239 people on board is still missing.

Saturday, 8 March

Just hours after the 12.40am flight disappeared, the Malaysia Airlines chief executive, Ahmad Jauhari Yahya, said the plane was still in contact with air traffic controllers about two hours into the flight, pinning the last contact at about 2.40am at a point 120 nautical miles off the east coast of Malaysia. But FlightAware, a flight-tracking website, showed the plane climbing to 10,700 metres (35,000ft) before disappearing from records at 1am, about 20 minutes after it took off. At 1am, the plane was scheduled to enter Vietnamese air space while flying between Malaysia and Ho Chi Minh City and did not. No distress signal was issued.

Twelve hours after the plane vanished, search-and-rescue teams from Malaysia, Singapore and Vietnam began looking for debris or wreckage off Vietnam. China and the Philippines soon sent over their own ships and aircraft to help. A few hours later, a Vietnamese admiral told media the aircraft could have crashed in Vietnamese waters near an island – with reports of a giant oil slick and column of smoke emerging. Soon, questions over whether terrorism was involved began circulating after an Italian and an Austrian came forward to say they had not flown on the flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing, despite being listed in the flight's manifest.

Sunday

A family member of a passenger on flight MH370. Photograph: Imaginechina/Rex

Teams from the US began aiding search efforts. Malaysia's prime minister, Najib Razak, said terrorism was a possibility as authorities began investigating reports that as many as four people on board MH370 may have been using stolen passports. Later that day, a Japan-bound pilot from another Boeing 777 claimed to have made contact with MH370 at 1.30am, minutes before it disappeared, saying he had asked the aircraft if it had entered Vietnamese airspace yet, but received only static and mumbling in return. Vietnam claimed to have found more debris, while the Malaysian transport minister, Hishammuddin Hussein, told reporters the aircraft may have turned back towards Malaysia. Later that day it emerged that the Italian and Austrian men believed to be on board the flight had had their passports stolen in Thailand within the past two years, prompting fears that the men using their passports were terrorists.

Monday

Two men who boarded the flight using stolen European passports. Photograph: Joshua Paul Gilbert/Rex

Malaysia's aviation chief Aharuddin Abdul Rahman stoked fears of a terrorist plot when he said five passengers had checked in but never boarded the flight. Authorities denied Vietnamese reports that debris had been found, with the oil slick believed to belong to the plane revealed to be from a ship, while the "life raft" spotted off the coast of Vietnam turned out to be a moss-covered cable reel. CCTV footage of the two men travelling on stolen European passports prompted Malaysian officials to describe them as resembling the black Italian striker Mario Balotelli. Razak demanded a review of Kuala Lumpur's security measures.

Tuesday

Chinese air force crew members search for the plane. Photograph: Xinhua/Landov/Barcroft Media

Malaysia Airlines said the pilots may have tried to turn the plane back towards Malaysia as the country widened its search-and-rescue hunt to include a wider trajectory and more teams. In a bizarre twist, Malaysia's air force chief Tan Sir Rodzali Daud said the plane had been detected at 2.40am near Pulau Perak, an island in the Malacca strait – indicating the plane had indeed flown back and was accounted for a whole hour later after it initially disappeared. He would later deny this claim. Earlier fears of terrorism were slightly assuaged as Interpol said that as more information emerged about the men it sounded less and less like terrorism. Interpol named the two as Pouria Nour Mohammad Mehrdad, 19, and Delavar Seyed Mohammadreza, 29, both from Iran. Reports suggested they were asylum seekers rather than terrorists.

Wednesday

Malaysia's acting transport minister, Hishammuddin Hussein, left, and Malaysia Airlines chief Ahmad Jauhari Yahya. Photograph: Wong Maye-E/AP

Daud said the last radar signal from the missing aircraft was received 200 miles north-west of Penang at 2.15am on Saturday – a third potential last sighting. This would put the last signal at 45 minutes after authorities had initially said they lost contact. However, Daud said the data had not been received in real time, so it could have belonged to another aircraft. "I'm not saying this is MH370. We are still corroborating this," he told a press conference. "There is a possibility of the aircraft making a comeback. It remains as a possibility … It is very difficult to say for sure it is the aircraft."

Unconfirmed reports also emerged of Malaysian fishermen spotting what looked like a life raft with the word "Boarding" on it floating off the east coast of Malaysia, although it is believed to have sunk when authorities attempted to bring it back to shore, while the Beijing News claimed that a dead body was seen in the Malacca strait wearing a life vest. There were still no confirmed reports of any sightings of passengers or debris as night fell.

Thursday

A Vietnamese military official looks out of a plane window during the hunt. Photograph: Luong Thai Linh/EPA

Sources "familiar with the details" of the missing Boeing 777 told the Wall Street Journal Sources that US investigators believed the plane had flown for a total of five hours, indicating that the plane may have been diverted "with the intention of using it later for another purpose". The theory was apparently based on data downloaded in real time and "sent to the ground" straight from the Boeing's engines, which are manufactured by the British company Rolls-Royce. The data-retrieval system is said to be standard procedure for maintaining and monitoring the engines and is loaded with information regarding the jet's performance, altitude and speed, which is then "compiled and transmitted in 30-minute increments", according to the Journal. A New Scientist report on the Boeing engine data-retrieval system also indicated that Rolls-Royce had received two data summaries from MH370 – one while it was taking off from Kuala Lumpur, and the second as it was climbing towards Beijing.

However, Malaysian officials denied that the engines transmitted any data past 1.07am. "We have contacted both the possible sources of data – Rolls-Royce and Boeing – and both have said they did not receive data beyond 1.07am," Ahmad, the Malaysia Airlines chief executive, told reporters on Thursday afternoon. "The last transmission at 1.07am stated that everything was operating normally."

Malaysian authorities have also stated that the plane was again caught on radar at 2.30am (this was later denied), and on military radar at 2.15am near the Malacca strait, indicating the plane had turned away from its flight path towards Beijing.

Officials are still verifying whether the "blip" on the military radar at 2.30am was actually the MH370, Hishammuddin reiterated on Thursday, and he refused to answer whether that blip had also dropped off the military radar.

Friday

After a week of no plane and no real leads, a dramatic storyline emerged after radar-trafficking data suggested MH370 may have flown deliberately off course towards the Andaman Islands after it last made contact with air traffic control, indicating that foul play was behind the jet's disappearance. Sources told Reuters the flight path of an unidentified aircraft investigators believed to be MH370 was following a route with specific navigational waypoints, suggesting someone with aviation training was at the helm, zigzagging the plane from its flightpath towards Beijing out west towards the Bay of Bengal. "What we can say is we are looking at sabotage, with hijack still on the cards," a senior Malaysian police official told Reuters.

Men offer prayers for the missing plane at the Kuala Lumpur international airport. Photograph: Wong Maye-E/AP

The revelations emerged the same day as reports that the aircraft's two communications systems were "systematically shut down" and that "manual intervention" was the probable cause. According to two US officials who spoke to ABC News, the 777's data reporting system was shut down at 1.07am, while the transponder – which sends back information to civilian radar regarding performance, location and altitude – was turned off at 1.21am. American authorities have since decided to move their search operation towards the Indian Ocean after an undisclosed suggestion the plane may have crashed there. "We have an indication the plane went down in the Indian Ocean," a senior Pentagon official said.

At a press conference late on Friday afternoon, Hishammuddin, Malaysia's acting transport minister, said authorities were investigating the possibility that the plane's communications systems had been deliberately shut down and said there were "four or five possibilities" why.

"It could have been done intentionally. It could be done under duress. It could have been done because of an explosion," he said. "That's why I don't want to go into the realm of speculation. We are looking at all the possibilities."

Hishammuddin confirmed that MH370's "whole passenger manifest", including crew, was being looked into and added: "If investigation requires searching the pilots' homes, it will be done."

The Wall Street Journal also changed its earlier report about "engine data" to "satellite pings", which are believed to also send back data regarding a plane's location. Malaysian authorities said they were working with US officials regarding this satellite data.