Transport Minister Liow Tiong Lai says both pieces of debris are consistent with panels found on a Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777 aircraft.

PUTRAJAYA: The debris found in South Africa and the Mauritian island of Rodrigues were confirmed to be "almost certainly" from MH370, according to Malaysian transport minister Liow Tiong Lai on Thursday (May 12).

The two pieces of debris - an engine cowling piece with a partial Rolls-Royce logo and an interior panel piece from an aircraft cabin - were examined by a team of international experts in Australia. The Malaysian ICAO Annex 13 Safety Investigation Team has concluded that both pieces of debris are consistent with panels found on a Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777 aircraft, the press release said.

"As such, the team has confirmed that both pieces of debris from South Africa and Rodrigues Island are almost certainly from MH370," said Mr Liow.

"This complements the results from the previous examination in March during which the team confirmed that the Mozambique debris were almost certainly from MH370."

He added that the governments of Malaysia, Australia and China continue to be "wholly committed" to the search for MH370. To date, more than 105,000 square kilometres of the search area have been completed, he added.

The Malaysia Airlines flight vanished in March 2014 when en route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing, with 239 people on board.

Advertisement

Advertisement

One of the new parts, washed up at Mossel Bay in South Africa, was an aircraft engine cowling, identified from a partial Rolls-Royce stencil.

While there was no direct link on the cowling unique to MH370, the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) said the stencil was consistent with those developed and used by Malaysian Airlines.

Mossel Bay is more than 2,000 kilometres (1,250 miles) from Vilankulo, the Mozambican resort where one of the earlier pieces of debris was found.

The other part, which came ashore on Rodrigues island in Mauritius, was a decorative laminate from a "work table" in the main cabin, used by no other Boeing 777 customer than Malaysia Airlines.

Given this, the ATSB concluded that "part no.3 was a Malaysian Airlines Boeing 777 engine cowling segment, almost certainly from the aircraft registered 9M-MRO", which operated as MH370.

"Part no.4 was a Malaysian Airlines Boeing 777 panel segment from the main cabin, associated with the Door R1 closet, almost certainly from the aircraft registered 9M-MRO."

STILL HOPEFUL

One of the pieces found in Mozambique, which had a number stencilled on it, was identified as a segment from a Boeing 777 flap track from the right wing, with the stencilling conforming to that used by Malaysia Airlines.

The other, which had the words "No Step" on it, was part of a Boeing 777 horizontal stabiliser panel with stencilling also consistent with that used by the carrier.

Australia is leading the painstaking search for the plane in the remote southern Indian Ocean, believed to be its final resting place, and has so far scoured 105,000 square kilometres of deep ocean floor without finding any trace.

Australian Transport Minister Darren Chester remained optimistic that more evidence could be found, offering hope to devastated next-of-kin still grasping for answers.

"The Australian government will continue to work closely with the Malaysian government and the People's Republic of China in our efforts to locate the missing aircraft," he said.

"We remain hopeful the aircraft will be found."

Despite this, if nothing turns up once the designated 120,000 square kilometre zone is fully searched, it is likely to be abandoned, Australia, Malaysia and China have jointly said.

In an operational update this week, Australia said three ships continued to hunt for the plane but winter weather had set in, with waves up to 12 metres (39 feet) and high winds hampering them.