Video

SEPANG, Malaysia — As the search for the missing Malaysia Airlines jetliner spread out across an expanded area nearly the size of the continental United States, the Chinese government said on Tuesday that it had ruled out the possibility that any of the Chinese citizens on the plane — about two-thirds of the 227 passengers — were terrorists, separatists or malcontents who might have tried to hijack or destroy it.

Searching one possible flight path, Australia said it would focus its efforts in a specific stretch of the southern Indian Ocean, using computer models of the plane’s possible flight path that take into account undisclosed satellite data, wind conditions and ocean currents and some assumptions about how fast it was flying and how much fuel it had left.

“What we’re doing is producing our best estimate of the most likely place to search, but I would hasten to add it is very far from precise,” said John Young, general manager for the Australian Maritime Safety Authority’s emergency response division. “Every attempt will be made to further refine the search area,” Mr. Young told reporters at a news conference in Canberra on Tuesday.

China’s public effort to narrow the range of possible suspects in the plane’s disappearance included a specific look at one Chinese citizen who belongs to the Uighur ethnic minority, a Turkic people living mostly in Xinjiang, a restive region in far western China.

Part of Xinjiang is included in the expanded search area for the missing plane. But the Chinese ambassador to Malaysia, Huang Huikang, said in Kuala Lumpur on Tuesday that Beijing had not received any relevant threats from Uighur separatist groups, and that the Uighur passenger had been cleared of suspicion.

“China has conducted a thorough investigation, and to date we have not found any signs that any passengers onboard the plane participated in destruction or terror attacks,” Mr. Huang said at a news briefing for Chinese reporters, according to a summary published online by a state-run newspaper, The People’s Daily.

“We can say that we have generally ruled out the possibility of Chinese passengers engaging in destruction or a terrorist attack,” Mr. Huang was quoted as saying.

The ambassador’s remarks were all the more striking because the Chinese government has often claimed that Uighur groups seeking autonomy or an independent homeland in Xinjiang have orchestrated acts of terrorism, including attempted attacks aboard domestic flights.

Tracking Flight 370 The sequence of events known by the authorities, in local times. Mar. 8, 2014 00:41 AM A Boeing 777-200 operated by Malaysia Airlines leaves Kuala Lumpur bound for Beijing with 227 passengers, of which two-thirds are Chinese, and a Malaysian crew of 12. Mar. 8, 2014 01:07 AM The airplane's Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System, or Acars, which transmits data about the plane's performance, sends a transmission. It is not due to transmit again for a half-hour. Mar. 8, 2014 01:19 AM The cockpit crew acknowledges a message from ground control, saying, "Good night Malaysian three seven zero." No further voice messages are received from the plane. Mar. 8, 2014 01:21 AM Two minutes after the last voice transmission, the plane's transponder, which signals its identity, altitude and speed to other aircraft and to monitors on the ground, is shut off or fails. Detecting a Plane Mar. 8, 2014 01:37 AM The Acars system fails to send its scheduled signal, indicating that it has been shut off or has failed sometime in the past half-hour. Mar. 8, 2014 02:15 AM An unidentified plane flying westward is detected by military radar. It ascends to 45,000 feet, above the approved limit for a Boeing 777, then descends unevenly to 23,000 feet and eventually flies out over the Indian Ocean. Investigators later conclude that it was Flight 370. It was last plotted 200 miles northwest of Panang. Q. and A. Mar. 8, 2014 06:30 AM By now Flight 370 was scheduled to have landed in Beijing. Mar. 8, 2014 07:24 AM Malaysia Airlines announces that it has lost contact with the aircraft. Mar. 8, 2014 08:11 AM The last complete signal is received from an automated satellite system on the plane, suggesting that it was still intact and flying. The Malaysian authorities say the jet had enough fuel to keep flying for perhaps a half-hour after this. Search Area Expanded Mar. 8, 2014 08:19 AM Inmarsat, a satellite communications company, says an incomplete signal representing a “partial handshake" may have been received.



Further analysis of satellite data confirms that the jet went down in the southern Indian Ocean. Mar. 15, 2014 00:00 AM The Malaysian authorities say the investigation has become a criminal matter because the jet appears to have been deliberately diverted. The plane's first turn off course, to the west, was executed using an onboard computer, probably programmed by someone with knowledge of aircraft systems.



The authorities say two passengers were Iranians who boarded using stolen European passports, but no links to terrorist groups are found.

Mr. Huang’s announcement seemed likely to increase the pressure on investigators to determine whether the pilot or co-pilot of the missing jet, both Malaysians, or anyone else onboard was involved in its disappearance. Officials have said that the plane’s abrupt deviation from its normal flight path on March 8 most likely involved deliberate intervention by an experienced aviator, making the two men assigned to the cockpit — Capt. Zaharie Ahmad Shah, 53, and his junior officer, Fariq Abdul Hamid, 27 — focal points of attention.

Mr. Huang explicitly ruled out suspicions about Maimaitijiang Abula, an artist of Uighur ethnicity who was part of a Chinese government-approved delegation of artists who had visited Malaysia. “Currently, there is no evidence to prove that he engaged in any terrorist or destructive activities,” Mr. Huang said, according to Chinese television news. “And nor has any organization or individual made political demands to the government concerning this incident.”

The Chinese government maintains extensive records and surveillance on its citizens, especially anyone with a reputation for discontent, and it would have used that information as the starting point for police inquiries into any potential suspects on the plane, according to Pan Zhiping, a professor at Xinjiang University who studies unrest in the region. Professor Pan said he saw “no signs of Uighur involvement.”

“These background checks are relatively easy in China,” he said. “I think that the government felt that this search is already so large and so complicated that it would be helpful to publicly exclude at least one aspect, especially when there have been many rumors and media speculation about a connection to Xinjiang.”

Breaking from its usual reluctance to criticize friendly neighbors, the Chinese government has chided the Malaysian authorities and demanded more prompt and more accurate information about the investigation. “Currently, there’s no lack of information,” Mr. Huang, the ambassador, said Tuesday. “The main problem we confront is chaotic information, with all manner of speculation, even rumors, filling the heavens. It makes it impossible to think.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

American officials said on Monday that the sharp turn to the west that took the plane from its planned northeastward flight path was achieved using a computer system on the plane, and that the turn was most likely programmed into it by someone in the cockpit who was knowledgeable about airplane systems.

Malaysian officials have not publicly confirmed that information, but they have revised their account of events around the time the plane vanished from air traffic control communications.

Hishammuddin Hussein, the Malaysian defense minister and acting transportation minister, said on Tuesday that despite the revisions to the details of the chronology, investigators continued to think that the plane probably went off course because of something someone did intentionally, rather than mechanical failure or an accident.