The next satellite signal from the aircraft would have been due by 9:15 a.m., but it never came. Mr. Hishammuddin referred delicately to the likelihood that signals stopped because the plane ran out of fuel and crashed, saying that the timing “is consistent with the maximum endurance of the aircraft.”

Photo

His office later released additional technical details about the way the satellite signals had been analyzed and about how those calculations had narrowed down the search area.

None of this appeared to have diminished the mistrust felt by the relatives and friends of Chinese citizens who were on Flight 370, who have been bitterly critical of Malaysia’s handling of the search. A group of them protested outside the Malaysian Embassy in Beijing at midday Tuesday, demanding that officials tell them the full truth about the flight.

The group shoved past police officers as it left its hotel and arrived at the embassy on foot about 40 minutes later. The street was crowded with journalists, police officers and people trying to reach some of the other embassies on the street. A line of paramilitary police officers blocked journalists from following the marchers up the road.

Video

The group presented a Malaysian diplomat with a scathing statement saying that the families would regard Malaysian leaders and the state-controlled operator of the flight, Malaysia Airlines, to be “murderers” if it emerged that missteps had led to the deaths of their loved ones.

Later in the afternoon at the hotel where the families were staying, a man who said that he represented them and that his surname was Wang asserted that the Malaysian government had not given any evidence to back its conclusion that the plane had crashed at sea with no survivors. He said most of the families did not believe that account.

The Malaysian ambassador to China arrived at the hotel after 3 p.m. and spoke privately to the relatives and friends gathered in the hotel ballroom. People in the room said the anger and frustration were palpable.

Photo

The Chinese government continued to express skepticism as well. “We are highly concerned with Malaysia’s conclusion, and have demanded full information and the evidence that supports the conclusion,” a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Hong Lei, said at a news conference.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Kuala Lumpur, Mr. Hishammuddin bristled when a succession of Chinese journalists questioned him about delays in finding the missing jetliner. “Can I also remind you that we received satellite data from China, regarding sightings in the South China Sea, which made us distract ourselves from the search and rescue to search areas that had already been searched?” he said.

His office released calculations from Inmarsat, a British satellite communications company, based on the handshake signals. Those calculations pointed to an area of the southern Indian Ocean where the plane must have wound up, assuming it was flying at a ground speed between 400 and 450 knots, or about 460 to 520 miles per hour. That narrowed the search area down to one-fifth of its peak size, though it is still vast — about 470,000 square nautical miles, greater than the area of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Oregon and Washington State combined.

Tracking Flight 370 The sequence of events known by the authorities, in local times. Mar. 8, 2014 00:41 AM A Boeing 777-200 operated by Malaysia Airlines leaves Kuala Lumpur bound for Beijing with 227 passengers, of which two-thirds are Chinese, and a Malaysian crew of 12. Mar. 8, 2014 01:07 AM The airplane's Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System, or Acars, which transmits data about the plane's performance, sends a transmission. It is not due to transmit again for a half-hour. Mar. 8, 2014 01:19 AM The cockpit crew acknowledges a message from ground control, saying, "Good night Malaysian three seven zero." No further voice messages are received from the plane. Mar. 8, 2014 01:21 AM Two minutes after the last voice transmission, the plane's transponder, which signals its identity, altitude and speed to other aircraft and to monitors on the ground, is shut off or fails. Detecting a Plane Mar. 8, 2014 01:37 AM The Acars system fails to send its scheduled signal, indicating that it has been shut off or has failed sometime in the past half-hour. Mar. 8, 2014 02:15 AM An unidentified plane flying westward is detected by military radar. It ascends to 45,000 feet, above the approved limit for a Boeing 777, then descends unevenly to 23,000 feet and eventually flies out over the Indian Ocean. Investigators later conclude that it was Flight 370. It was last plotted 200 miles northwest of Panang. Q. and A. Mar. 8, 2014 06:30 AM By now Flight 370 was scheduled to have landed in Beijing. Mar. 8, 2014 07:24 AM Malaysia Airlines announces that it has lost contact with the aircraft. Mar. 8, 2014 08:11 AM The last complete signal is received from an automated satellite system on the plane, suggesting that it was still intact and flying. The Malaysian authorities say the jet had enough fuel to keep flying for perhaps a half-hour after this. Search Area Expanded Mar. 8, 2014 08:19 AM Inmarsat, a satellite communications company, says an incomplete signal representing a “partial handshake" may have been received.



Further analysis of satellite data confirms that the jet went down in the southern Indian Ocean. Mar. 15, 2014 00:00 AM The Malaysian authorities say the investigation has become a criminal matter because the jet appears to have been deliberately diverted. The plane's first turn off course, to the west, was executed using an onboard computer, probably programmed by someone with knowledge of aircraft systems.



The authorities say two passengers were Iranians who boarded using stolen European passports, but no links to terrorist groups are found.

Surveillance aircraft have been trying to sweep about 20,000 square nautical miles of ocean a day, though they could not do so on Tuesday because of a storm. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority said the search would resume on Wednesday.

“We are not searching for a needle in a haystack; we are still trying to define where the haystack is,” Air Marshal Mark Binskin, the deputy chief of the Australian military, told reporters at Pearce Air Force Base near Perth, Australia, where the aircraft are based.

David Johnston, Australia’s defense minister, said the search area was “probably one of the most remote parts of the planet” and one that “has shipwrecked many sailors.” He said an Australian ship that was hunting for possible floating debris had to move 75 miles off its station on Tuesday because of the weather.

Where Objects Have Been Spotted In the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370. 5,000 FT. Possible flight paths AUSTRALIA INDIAN OCEAN WATER DEPTH 10,000 FT. Perth 10,000 FT. Areas previously searched Albany 15,000 FT. 10,000 FT. OBJECTS SPOTTED March 16 (satellite image) 122 objects spotted by a satellite on March 23 March 18 (satellite image) March 24 (by a Chinese plane) More maps

Debris

Tracking

Sorting Out

the Clues

Reconstructing

the Path

Mr. Johnston called the maritime search, involving ships and aircraft from Australia, New Zealand, China, South Korea, Japan, the United States and other nations, “one of the largest efforts you’ll ever see.” But none of the vessels had yet recovered any of the large floating objects sighted by planes or satellites, suggesting that the plane could be in an altogether different area.

An American submersible craft capable of finding objects on the sea floor was being flown to Perth on Tuesday, but Rear Adm. John Kirby, a Pentagon spokesman, said it would be useful only once the general location of the plane’s wreckage was known.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s being sent there to be ready, should there be a need,” Admiral Kirby said. “And right now, there’s no need. We do not have a debris field.”

As for the Malaysian police inquiry into the plane’s disappearance, Khalid bin Abu Bakar, the forces’ inspector general, declined to discuss details on Tuesday, saying, “That would jeopardize the ongoing investigations.”

In Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Airlines said that though the investigation had not found the plane or the reason it vanished, relatives of those on board had to let go of any hope for a miracle.

“We must accept the painful reality that the aircraft is now lost, and that none of the passengers or crew on board survived,” said Mohamed Nor Yusof, the chairman of Malaysia Airlines. He said the airline’s primary responsibility now was caring for the grieving families.