Fugro Discovery is docked in the Western Australian port of Fremantle to be fitted with a towfish and other equipment. It should arrive at the search zone about Oct. 17. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

The deep-sea hunt for missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 resumed Monday in a remote stretch of the southern Indian Ocean as the first search ship began sonar sweeps of the ocean floor.

The arrival of the ship GO Phoenix, which left Jakarta in late September, marks the start of a rebooted search after experts spent the past few months carefully mapping the crevasses, volcanoes and mountains that dot the sea floor more than 1,000 miles from Australia’s west coast.

GO Phoenix begins its mission toward the southernmost end of an area covering about 60,000 square kilometers—roughly the size of the Australian island state of Tasmania—that the search had previously focused on, Martin Dolan, chief commissioner of the Australian Transport Safety Bureau, the agency leading the multinational hunt, told The Wall Street Journal.

The decision to focus the search on this area suggests investigators have concluded the Boeing 777 went faster and flew farther than projected by many earlier analyses.

“It’s an acknowledgment that the further south solution is more likely” to answer the puzzle of where the plane went down, said Tim Farrar, a northern California-based satellite-industry consultant.

But the shift portends difficulties for search teams. The ocean is deeper farther to the south, storms tend to be more violent and logistics are harder as search ships have to sail potentially hundreds of additional miles from Australian ports.

Potentially, the underwater hunt could end up moving so far south that it may even extend beyond the previously designated lower-priority search areas, Mr. Farrar said.

GO Phoenix has deployed a delicate sonar device known as a towfish that is pulled along 100 meters above the seafloor.

Mr. Dolan previously said another ship, Fugro Discovery, had docked in the Western Australian port of Fremantle on Sunday to be fitted with a towfish and other equipment. After several days of fitting and testing the equipment, the ship is due to set sail and should arrive in the search zone about Oct. 17.

The towfish are fitted with side-scan sonar and can carry video equipment and other sensors, including ones that can detect traces of jet fuel, Mr. Dolan said.

A third vessel that will take part in the search, Fugro Equator, is completing a bathymetric survey of a long but narrow arc of sea floor where the search has been concentrated. It is slated to finish mapping by the end of the month, after which it is scheduled to journey to Fremantle, where it will be fitted with similar search equipment, Mr. Dolan said.

If successful, searchers could help solve one of the greatest mysteries in aviation history. Flight 370 disappeared en route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing on March 8 with 239 passengers on board. Investigators believe the plane crashed when it ran out of fuel.

Military search crews spent about 100 days scanning the ocean surface for debris after the Boeing 777 went missing but turned up nothing linked to the aircraft. An initial underwater search also failed to find any trace of Flight 370.

Australia selected Dutch oil-and-gas consulting firm Fugro NV to lead a renewed search for the Malaysian jetliner in early August after a monthlong tender process. The ship GO Phoenix and equipment and a crew provided by Phoenix International was sent by Malaysia’s government to assist Fugro’s vessels.

—Andy Pasztor contributed to this article.

Write to Robb M. Stewart at robb.stewart@wsj.com