(Flight MH370) MESSAGE FROM BEIJING: “LIARS”

(03-25 13:20)



Furious over Malaysia's handling of the lost Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777 a day after the prime minister said the passengers must be dead, Chinese relatives of the missing marched to the Malaysia Embassy, where they threw plastic water bottles, tried to rush the gate and chanted, “Liars!''

One of the most vocal campaigners against the Malaysian government, Wen Wancheng, burst out crying, his face contorted with emotion.

“My son, my son, return my son!'' screamed the 63-year-old, as relatives behind him chanted slogans, raising their right fists. Behind him others bowed their heads and sobbed.

The Chinese government, meanwhile, demanded that Malaysia turn over the satellite data it used to conclude that Flight 370 was lost in the southern Indian Ocean with no survivors during a flight to Beijing.

Among the flight's 239 passengers, 153 were Chinese nationals.

Nearly 100 relatives and their supporters marched to the embassy in the late morning, wearing white T-shirts that read “Let's pray for MH370'' as they held banners and chanted.

“Tell the truth! Return our relatives!'' they shouted. There was a heavy police presence at the embassy when the group arrived, and journalists were being kept away.

Family members of the missing passengers have complained bitterly about a lack of reliable information. Many have said they suspect they are not being told the whole truth _ a not-uncommon mindset among ordinary Chinese accustomed to dealing with their own opaque, party-ruled communist state.

Deputy Foreign Minister Xie Hangsheng told Malaysia's ambassador to Beijing that China wanted to know what exactly led Malaysia to announce last night that the plane had been lost, China's Foreign Ministry said on its website Tuesday.--AP/AFP



Furious over Malaysia's handling of the lost Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777 a day after the prime minister said the passengers must be dead, Chinese relatives of the missing marched to the Malaysia Embassy, where they threw plastic water bottles, tried to rush the gate and chanted, “Liars!''One of the most vocal campaigners against the Malaysian government, Wen Wancheng, burst out crying, his face contorted with emotion.“My son, my son, return my son!'' screamed the 63-year-old, as relatives behind him chanted slogans, raising their right fists. Behind him others bowed their heads and sobbed.The Chinese government, meanwhile, demanded that Malaysia turn over the satellite data it used to conclude that Flight 370 was lost in the southern Indian Ocean with no survivors during a flight to Beijing.Among the flight's 239 passengers, 153 were Chinese nationals.Nearly 100 relatives and their supporters marched to the embassy in the late morning, wearing white T-shirts that read “Let's pray for MH370'' as they held banners and chanted.“Tell the truth! Return our relatives!'' they shouted. There was a heavy police presence at the embassy when the group arrived, and journalists were being kept away.Family members of the missing passengers have complained bitterly about a lack of reliable information. Many have said they suspect they are not being told the whole truth _ a not-uncommon mindset among ordinary Chinese accustomed to dealing with their own opaque, party-ruled communist state.Deputy Foreign Minister Xie Hangsheng told Malaysia's ambassador to Beijing that China wanted to know what exactly led Malaysia to announce last night that the plane had been lost, China's Foreign Ministry said on its website Tuesday.--AP/AFP