Leading aviation experts are confronted with a shocking theory as they investigate one of the greatest aviation mysteries of all time.

First Air Flight 6560 slammed into a hillside near Resolute Bay, one of the most remote airports in the world.

A Learjet 45 carrying Mexico's interior minister slams into Mexico City's financial district, killing everyone on board and seven on the ground.

A Concorde crashes moments after take off and three mysterious items are found on the runway. How is this collection of clues connected?

The celebrity son of JFK disappeared along with his plane in 1999. Invstigators soon found the wreckage, but what brought the aircraft down?

When FedEx Flight 80 bounces off the runway and bursts into flames, the catastrophe recalls an identical crash more than a decade earlier.

Flight 201 takes off for a one-hour flight to Colombia and then disappears from radar while flying over one of the most remote jungles on Earth.

When British Midland Flight 92 has an engine fire, the pilots try to make a landing, but the second engine fails before they can get to safety.

Watch brand new episodes of Air Crash Investigation Mondays at 9PM. Flying is one of the safest forms of transport. But what happens when tragedy strikes? From human error and accidents to mechanical faults and design flaws, the success of aviation history is punctuated with disaster and catastrophe. It’s rare , but it does happen. Follow experts as they determine what went wrong and work out how to prevent these horrific tragedies from happening again. Examine the wrecks and official records, and hear from eyewitnesses , passengers and aviation experts as we reconstruct some of the most tragic disasters in aviation history. Air Crash Investigation looks at what went wrong and how future disasters can be averted.

Your cookie settings

Cookies are very small text files that are stored on your computer when you visit some websites.



We use cookies to make our website easier for you to use. You can remove any cookies already stored on your computer, but these may prevent you from using parts of our website.

Select one of these options in order to change your cookie settings

Strictly necessary and performance

Functional Remember user log-in. Remember cookie settings. Allow anonymous site usage stats collection. Allow Social integration.

For your new settings to take effect, this page will automatically refresh when you click ‘Save and close’.