Could a shipment of lithium-ion batteries on the missing flight MH370 be responsible for a fire on board the aircraft, the Mail Online asked today.

The online version of UK's Daily Mail said Malaysia Airlines chief executive officer Ahmad Jauhari Yahya admitted that the plane was carrying highly flammable lithium-ion batteries.

The latest admission has reignited speculation that a fire might be responsible for its disappearance two weeks ago. On March 17, Ahmad Jauhari (pic) had said at the daily press briefing that flight MH370 was transporting three to four tonnes of mangosteens to China, stressing that there was no dangerous cargo on board.

(The International Civil Aviation Organisation defines dangerous goods as articles or substances which are capable of posing a risk to health, safety, property or the environment. It had, in February 2013, prohibited the carriage of lithium-ion aircraft batteries as cargo on passenger planes.)

The Mail Online report said lithium-ion batteries have caused 140 mid-air incidents in the last 20 years. They are commonly used in mobile phones and laptops.

Ahmad Jauhari said the authorities were investigating the cargo but did not regard the batteries as hazardous because they were packaged according to safety regulations.

"We carried some lithium-ion small batteries, they are not big batteries and they are basically approved under the ICAO under dangerous goods," the Mail Online quoted him as saying. "They (lithium-ion batteries) are not dangerous goods per se, but in terms (of) they are (being) declared as dangerous goods under ICAO."

Ahmad Jauhari said the lithium-ion batteries were checked several times to ensure they complied with the guidelines.

"Airlines do that all the time, it is not just Malaysia Airlines. These goods are being flown by many airlines as cargo anyway, (which) is based on ICAO’s ruling," the Mail Online quoted him as saying.

The revelation has thrown the spotlight back on the theory that the Boeing 777-200ER (9M-MRO) may have been overcome by a fire, rendering the crew and passengers unconscious after inhaling toxic fumes, said the Mail Online.

According to the United States-based Federal Aviation Administration, lithium-ion batteries carried in the cargo or baggage have been responsible for more than 140 incidents between March 1991 and February 17, 2014, reports newsportal Malaysiakini.

In rare cases, aircraft have been destroyed as a result of fires started from the devices, although they have been cargo planes in both incidents, said the Mail Online.

In one case, UPS Airlines flight 6 crashed while attempting an emergency landing in September 2010 en route from Dubai to Cologne in Germany.

Billie Vincent, the former head of security for the US Federal Aviation Administration, said the revelation that flight MH370 was carrying lithium-ion batteries reaffirmed his belief that flames started in the cargo hold and destroyed the aircraft's communication systems and filled the cabin with toxic fumes, the Mail Online reported.

Vincent said this would have overwhelmed the passengers but may have given the pilots a chance to divert the aircraft for an emergency landing.

Lithium-ion batteries do have the ability to burst into flames, and while it is uncommon, when they ignite, they can cause an extreme fire.

Lithium-ion batteries are sensitive to high temperatures and heat can cause the battery packs to degrade much faster than they normally would.

Flight MH370 disappeared from the radar on March 8 en route to Beijing from the Kuala Lumpur International Airport and so far, search teams from 26 nations have yet to locate any sign of the aircraft.

Following up on the latest lead, aircraft and ships have been scouring the seas around 2,500km off the coast of the Australian city of Perth to try and locate objects shown on satellite images which investigators said might be linked to flight MH370. – March 22, 2014.