Hypoxia occurs when a plane loses air pressure and the pilots, lacking adequate oxygen, become confused and incapable of performing even basic manual tasks, though they continue to feel confident in their own abilities.

Pilots are trained to put on oxygen masks immediately if an aircraft suffers depressurization; their masks have only an hour’s air supply, however. The plane, with 239 people aboard, made its turn south toward the Indian Ocean about an hour after it stopped responding to air traffic controllers. It is believed to have crashed somewhere in the southern Indian Ocean off the western coast of Australia. Australian officials have been coordinating the search.

Reconstructing the Plane’s Path The main communications systems of the Malaysia Airlines plane ceased working about 40 minutes into the flight, forcing investigators to try to piece together the plane’s location from other systems. Transponder Secondary Radar and Text Updates Air traffic controllers typically know a plane’s location based on what is called secondary radar, which requests information from the plane’s transponder. A plane also uses radio or satellite signals to send regular updates through Acars, the Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System. Both of those systems were turned off. Primary Radar Two Malaysian military radar stations tracked a plane using primary radar, which sends out radio signals and listens for echoes that bounce off objects in the sky. Primary radar does not require a plane to have a working transponder. SATELLITE Satellite Communications If Acars updates are turned off, the plane still sends a “keep-alive” signal, that can be received by satellites. The signal does not indicate location, but it can help to narrow down the plane’s position. A satellite picked up six complete signals and a seventh partial, about one per hour, after it left the range of military radar.

Passengers’ masks have only a few minutes of oxygen, based on the theory that the pilot of a troubled plane will quickly descend to an altitude at which there is little need for a supplemental air supply.

The report added that the theory of an unresponsive crew possibly suffering from hypoxia was an operating assumption for the search and was not meant to infringe on Malaysia’s authority as the government responsible for conclusively identifying a cause for the loss of the plane.

There is no consensus among investigators, even within the Australian government, on the hypoxia or unresponsive-crew theory. Angus Houston, the retired head of the Australian military who is overseeing the country’s search, said in a telephone interview this month that he assumed that the flight had been on autopilot even if a conscious pilot had been at the controls. That is because a Boeing 777 is a very difficult plane to fly manually.

Other officials, who insisted on anonymity because of the diplomatic sensitivity of the issue with Malaysia and China — most of the flight’s passengers were Chinese — said some investigators still leaned toward the possibility that one of the pilots deliberately flew the plane to the southern Indian Ocean in a suicide mission that also killed everyone else aboard.

Advocates of the hypoxia theory argue that pilot suicide cases tend to involve pilots who crashed their planes suddenly, not after hours of flight. A clinical psychologist advising the investigation has been very skeptical of the suicide theory, saying it would be highly unusual for a suicidal person to proceed with such a deadly plan over many hours, investigators said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Depressurization of an aircraft can occur from mechanical failure, an attempted hijacking or many other causes. If a plane undergoes gradual depressurization, pilots do not necessarily notice that they are losing oxygen, and with it, their mental clarity. Masks are supposed to deploy automatically with a loss of air pressure, but they need to be fitted properly for a full flow of oxygen.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At a news conference here on Thursday afternoon, Martin Dolan, the chief commissioner of the Australian Transport Safety Bureau, said someone on the plane had put it on autopilot, but he declined to speculate as to who might have done so and why. “If the autopilot is operational, it’s because it has been switched on,” Mr. Dolan said.

Based on recent analysis of data from electronic “handshakes” between the plane and a satellite operated by the company Inmarsat, the Boeing 777-200 appears to have followed a straight track to the south, Mr. Dolan added.

Tracking Flight 370 The sequence of events known by the authorities, in local times. Mar. 8, 2014 00:41 AM A Boeing 777-200 operated by Malaysia Airlines leaves Kuala Lumpur bound for Beijing with 227 passengers, of which two-thirds are Chinese, and a Malaysian crew of 12. Mar. 8, 2014 01:07 AM The airplane's Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System, or Acars, which transmits data about the plane's performance, sends a transmission. It is not due to transmit again for a half-hour. Mar. 8, 2014 01:19 AM The cockpit crew acknowledges a message from ground control, saying, "Good night Malaysian three seven zero." No further voice messages are received from the plane. Mar. 8, 2014 01:21 AM Two minutes after the last voice transmission, the plane's transponder, which signals its identity, altitude and speed to other aircraft and to monitors on the ground, is shut off or fails. Detecting a Plane Mar. 8, 2014 01:37 AM The Acars system fails to send its scheduled signal, indicating that it has been shut off or has failed sometime in the past half-hour. Mar. 8, 2014 02:15 AM An unidentified plane flying westward is detected by military radar. It ascends to 45,000 feet, above the approved limit for a Boeing 777, then descends unevenly to 23,000 feet and eventually flies out over the Indian Ocean. Investigators later conclude that it was Flight 370. It was last plotted 200 miles northwest of Panang. Q. and A. Mar. 8, 2014 06:30 AM By now Flight 370 was scheduled to have landed in Beijing. Mar. 8, 2014 07:24 AM Malaysia Airlines announces that it has lost contact with the aircraft. Mar. 8, 2014 08:11 AM The last complete signal is received from an automated satellite system on the plane, suggesting that it was still intact and flying. The Malaysian authorities say the jet had enough fuel to keep flying for perhaps a half-hour after this. Search Area Expanded Mar. 8, 2014 08:19 AM Inmarsat, a satellite communications company, says an incomplete signal representing a “partial handshake" may have been received.



Further analysis of satellite data confirms that the jet went down in the southern Indian Ocean. Mar. 15, 2014 00:00 AM The Malaysian authorities say the investigation has become a criminal matter because the jet appears to have been deliberately diverted. The plane's first turn off course, to the west, was executed using an onboard computer, probably programmed by someone with knowledge of aircraft systems.



The authorities say two passengers were Iranians who boarded using stolen European passports, but no links to terrorist groups are found.

Warren Truss, the deputy prime minister of Australia and also the minister for infrastructure and regional development, said at the news conference that Australia planned to hire a contractor to scour a rectangular area of ocean floor covering 23,000 square miles. Up to three deep-sea submersibles will be used for the yearlong endeavor, starting in August.

By comparison, a fruitless search of ocean floor 500 miles farther to the northeast by a United States Navy contractor in late April and May, after the detection of acoustic pings initially believed to have been from the aircraft’s so-called black boxes, covered only 332 square miles.

The midpoint of the new search area is 1,100 miles west-northwest of Perth, Australia. The Fugro Equator, the vessel under contract by Australia, is already mapping at the near end of the new search area to Australia, about 960 miles northwest of Perth.

The new search area runs 400 miles along the “seventh arc” of possible locations for the aircraft, based on the seventh and last electronic handshake that it had with the satellite. The area has a width of only 58 miles on the assumption that the plane was on autopilot and quickly stalled and crashed when it ran out of fuel.

Aircraft and ships searched the new search area for floating debris on the 21st through 26th days after the plane disappeared, and found nothing.

Tim Farrar, a satellite communications consultant in Menlo Park, Calif., one of a group of satellite experts who have been independently analyzing clues to Flight 370’s disappearance, said in a telephone interview that assuming that the plane was on autopilot simplified the search and reduced the range of places along the seventh arc where the plane might have come to rest.

But he cautioned that the electronic handshakes could also be compatible with stable flight controlled by a human pilot. He questioned whether the report or Australian officials had enough information to justify their assumption that the plane was being controlled entirely by autopilot.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Farrar said that the new search might not find the plane either. “It wouldn’t surprise me if there’s a reasonable probability it’s outside the defined search area,” he said. “It’s going to be a difficult search.”