The one-off documentary will examine unanswered questions about how, in this day and age, it is possible for an airplane to disappear.

Discovery Networks International has commissioned a special one-hour documentary about the mysterious disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370.

Entitled Flight 370: The Missing Links, the doc will gather the foremost thinkers in aviation and security to explore key questions surrounding the missing plane, which has garnered worldwide attention and generated widespread speculation.

STORY: Hollywood Already Exploring a Malaysia Airlines Movie

The Discovery Communications unit commissioned the show to ask industry experts to account for just how it is possible to lose track of an airliner – analyzing evidence, deliberating the global frailties of aviation and divulging potential solutions to prevent the disappearance of an aircraft from ever happening again.

Flight 370: The Missing Links is produced by ITN Productions and will air in more than 220 countries and territories worldwide on Discovery Channel from early April.

Tom Gorham, exec producer for DNI, said: "The mystery of Flight MH370 serves as a tragic reminder that technology is indeed fallible. With the help of seasoned aviation, tracking and satellite industry experts, Flight 370: The Missing Links explores the events which have unfolded, focusing on just how this could have happened, and examining the inherent flaws in the eco-system of modern international travel."

ITN Productions factual and features chief Emma Read added: "The disappearance of Flight MH370 challenges everything we know about modern aviation technology. This documentary reveals what every passenger should know and the technology being developed now to protect us in the future."

STORY: Peter Jackson Lends Private Jet to Search for Malaysia Airlines Flight

The documentary is commissioned by Elizabeth McIntyre for DNI.

In an age when we can use apps to locate handheld devices, the special also looks at how a state-of-the-art airliner and its 239 passengers and crew can simply vanish.

Since Flight MH370 went off the grid on March 8, 2014, questions about flight safety have once again taken center stage.

In an attempt to answer some of these questions, the documentary will address seven missing links: airport security, air traffic control, on-board communication systems, mechanical failure, tracking – both radar and satellite – international cooperation and the black box.