Breaking News Emails Get breaking news alerts and special reports. The news and stories that matter, delivered weekday mornings. SUBSCRIBE

Russian President Vladimir Putin suggested Thursday that the United States is trying to interfere in Russia's presidential elections through punishments meted out against its Olympic athletes, according to a state news agency.

"In response to our alleged interference in their elections [in the United States], they want to stir up problems during [the] Russian presidential election," Putin said, according to the state news agency TASS.

The World Anti-Doping Agency last year accused Russia of running a state-sponsored doping system from 2011 to 2015.

The International Olympic Committee, or IOC, on Thursday announced sanctions against four Russian athletes related to the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia, saying they committed anti-doping rule violations. The IOC announced sanctions against two other Russian athletes for doping violations from the 2014 Sochi games on Nov. 1.

Russian President Vladimir Putin, center, in the central Vietnamese city of Danang ahead of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit on Friday. Ye Aung Thu / AFP - Getty Images

Putin has not officially declared his candidacy yet in the March election.

Related: Putin's Would-Be Replacements Playing the Long Game

Russia has denied having a state-run doping system. Putin said Thursday that the country has never had such a system, but he acknowledged that "certain instances [of doping abuse] are taking place just like in other countries," according to TASS.

But Putin suggested that the United States was behind the allegations by trying to draw a link between the Winter Olympics in South Korea in February and Russia's presidential election, according to TASS. Putin claimed that the Olympics depend on TV broadcast rights and advertisers.

"There are vast suspicions that all this is being done to stoke an atmosphere necessary for someone where sports fans and athletes are disgruntled over the fact that the state is allegedly involved in breaches and it is responsible for that," Putin said, according to TASS.

U.S. intelligence agencies have concluded that Russia was involved in a campaign to try and influence the 2016 U.S. presidential election.