Amid the gleaming, state-of-the art sports arenas and luxury hotels constructed at great expense for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Russia 's Black Sea resort of Sochi is a patch of muddy wasteland where Yevgeny Mzokov's home once stood.

"I lived in this house for over 20 years," says Yevgeny, his anger tinged with a sadness that seems etched into his face. "And then they started building for the Olympics.

Mr Mzokov's father, Alexander, built the three-storey house in the centre of Sochi in the early 1990s after fleeing the horrors of civil war in the former Soviet republic of Tajikistan. By 2012, 12 members of the Mzokov extended family – eight adults and four children – called it home.

That spring, with the Kremlin's seven-year colossal construction project for Sochi 2014 in full swing, local Olympic officials arrived at the family's house with some unexpected news.

"They told us that they needed to pull down our house to build a road for the Olympics," Mr Mzokov recalls.

"We told them 'Ok, pay the market price, and no problem.' They agreed."

An independent surveyor carried out an estimate on the 300-square metre house, located in the centre of the popular beach resort. But, in a development that human rights groups say has become depressingly common in Sochi in the lead-up to the Games, the Mzokovs received "not a single kopeck" in compensation for their home before it was flattened by bulldozers.

The family, says Mr Mzokov, were simply "kicked out in the street"; his elderly father dragged out of his home by bailiffs. Local authorities refused to negotiate and offered the family no alternative housing.

Mr Mzokov says that the money the family was promised was embezzled by corrupt local officials in the regional governor's office. He also believes that his attempts to push for justice resulted in his employer being pressured to fire him from his job at a delivery business, as well as police harassment.

The Mzokov family's house was destroyed by the authorities in Sochi

"They are trying to put me in jail."

Critics of the government insist cases such as this are just the tip of Olympic-related corruption that reaches all the way to a small group of Kremlin-connected businessmen with long-standing ties to President Vladimir Putin.

At an eye-watering cost of some £31 billion – three times the price of the much bigger 2012 Summer Olympics in London – the two-week long Sochi Games are set to be the most expensive Olympics in history. In fact, Kremlin critics have calculated that the Games are more costly than all the previous 21 Winter Olympics combined.

The facts and figures behind Russia's astronomical spending on the Games, as well as the widespread allegations of corruption, have already entered national folklore, testimony to what the liberal politician and Kremlin critic Boris Nemtsov calls the "out-of-control, absolutely immoral behaviour of the authorities."

In one particular case, a 30-mile long road built especially for the Games cost an estimated £5 billion, making its construction almost four times as expensive as Nasa's project to send the Curiosity Rover to Mars. The Russian version of Esquire magazine has estimated that the same road could have been paved with a six-centimetre layer of truffles for the same price. Or a one-centimetre layer of black caviar.

In their damning 2013 report on the Sochi Games, Mr Nemtsov and fellow political activist Leonid Martynyuk stated that some £16 billion of the total cost of the Winter Olympics has been skimmed off in "embezzlement and kickbacks" by Mr Putin's businessmen friends. "The Games are nothing but a monstrous scam," says Mr Nemtsov, a former deputy prime minister.

Mr Nemtsov's accusations have been echoed by International Olympic Committee member Gian-Franco Kasper, who said earlier this month that he believed around one third of Sochi's multi-billion dollar budget had been siphoned off by Mr Putin and his friends. His comments were angrily rebuked by Russian officials, with close Kremlin ally Vladimir Yakunin, head of the massive Russian Railways company, calling for Mr Kasper to be sued for slander.

One man who has undoubtedly benefited from the Games is Mr Putin's childhood friend and ex-judo-sparring partner, Arkady Rotenberg, whose companies have received orders for Olympic construction projects worth around £4.5 billion – more than the entire cost of the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics.

Mr Rotenberg, 62, has consistently denied that his vast wealth is in any way connected to his long friendship with Mr Putin. He did, however, suggest in an interview last year that Mr Putin was "sent to our country by God." ("Yes, as the angel of the apocalypse," they joked in opposition circles.)

"Putin needs these Games to prove how great he is," says Mr Nemtsov. "But his friends and the businessmen around him need the Olympics to improve their ratings in the Forbes magazine's richest people in the world listings."

When a confident Mr Putin gave a rare English-language speech in front of International Olympic Organisation delegates in Guatemala in July 2007, he rounded off his country's bid for the 2014 Games with proud references to the "new Russia" that had emerged from the turmoil of the post-Soviet years.

The Mzokov family whose house was destroyed

Seven years on, Mr Putin is seeking to use the Olympics to showcase what he regards as Russia's resurgence – political, economic and spiritual – under his long rule.

In many respects, Mr Putin has much to be proud of.

In the 14 years since he was unexpectedly named acting president by the ailing President Boris Yeltsin, Mr Putin has overseen a dramatic increase in living standards in large cities such as Moscow and St Petersburg and returned some of the Kremlin's standing in the international arena.

But his critics claim the oil dollars that flooded into Russia in the 2000s were misspent or simply siphoned off, and that the Games are little more than an expensive "Olympic façade" designed to cover up startling wealth inequality, rampant corruption, and political intimidation.

"For Putin, the Olympics are part of his growing geopolitical ambitions," says Ilya Yashin, a political activist and key figure in the anti-government protests that rocked Moscow in 2011 and 2012.

"He'll spend as much as it takes to make sure the Sochi Games are successful, but he doesn't give a damn about Russia's many social problems."

And the statistics paint a disturbing portrait of Putin's Russia. In a report last year, the financial-services company Credit Suisse labelled wealth inequality in Russia the highest in the world, with the exception of Caribbean islands with resident billionaires.

"Worldwide, billionaires collectively account for 1 – 2 per cent of total household wealth; in Russia today 110 billionaires own 35 per cent of all wealth," the Swiss company reported.

Compare this with the situation in some of Russia's neglected regions, such as the southern republic of Kalmykia, where average salaries are £300 a month, around twice as low as in the capital, Moscow.

The problem of wealth inequality pales, however, when compared to Russia's apocalyptic HIV infection rates. An estimated 1.3 million people are estimated to be living with HIV in the country, the highest number in the world outside Africa and India.

In one Russian region, the South Urals, health officials reported last year that 11 per cent of all pregnant women were testing HIV positive.

The World Bank estimates that Russia will need to spend at least £1.5 billion a year to stem the rapid rise in HIV infections. However, in 2013, the Kremlin allocated just £360 million on HIV treatment and testing. That's around 80 times less than Mr Putin has lavished on the Sochi Olympics.

"Spending such a colossal sum of money [on the Games] is nothing more than an act of vanity by the head of state," television presenter Ksenia Sobchak, a well-connected socialite turned opposition figure, said in an interview this month with anti-Kremlin protesters Pussy Riot.

"I dream of turning on the television during the Olympics and seeing you do something there that would give an entirely different meaning to the Games," Miss Sobchak told the recently-freed Pussy Riot members, Nadezhda Tolokonnikova and Maria Alyokhina.

Miss Sobchak is likely to be disappointed. There is almost no chance of Pussy Riot or any other Kremlin foes turning up in Sochi to embarrass Mr Putin at the Games.

Unprecedented security measures that went into force on January 7 have locked down Sochi and the area around the Olympic host city. Anyone wishing to pass through Olympic checkpoints will have to produce a passport and a fan document, which can only be acquired by providing personal information to the government-controlled Olympic organising committee. The security measures are mainly intended to deter militant attacks on the Games, but activists say they will also make it impossible for political activists to travel to Sochi during the Olympics.

"The situation in Sochi right now reminds me of when Moscow hosted the 1980 Summer Olympics," says Yashin, the anti-Putin activist.

"Back then 'undesirables' were simply rounded up and take out of the city for the duration of the Games. This time around, the authorities simply won't let such people into the host city."

In an apparent attempt to make doubly sure that no Kremlin critics stir up trouble for the authorities in Sochi during the Games, security forces have stepped up harassment of well-known regional activists.

In the most serious case, environmental activist Yevgeny Vitishko was jailed last month for three years. The charges against Mr Vitishko related to his alleged spray-painting of a fence he said was erected around an illegally constructed country home belonging to Krasnodar regional governor Alexander Tkachev.

Back in Sochi, Yevgeny Mzokov is despondent about his chances of forcing the authorities to pay up the money he says they owe his family. For now, the Mzokovs are being put up by friends. As for the impending Olympics, Mr Mzokov is trying his best to ignore them.

"I've got no time at all for the Olympics. I'm busy just trying to survive."

Marc Bennetts has lived in Russia for almost 15 years. His book, Kicking the Kremlin, (Oneworld) is available to order from Telegraph Books at £10.99 + £1.35 p&p. Call 0844 871 1514 or visit books.telegraph.co.uk