Organisers of the Sochi Winter Olympics are facing an accommodation crisis just days before the opening ceremony after contractors failed to meet deadlines to provide hostels for workers.

Heightened security around the games has hampered the work of staff and volunteers, while human rights workers have started legal action after being denied access to events.

Dormitories that were intended to house 25,000 volunteers, mostly Russian university students, are still construction sites and at least 5,000 workers have been transferred to hotels and apartments that were meant to be for journalists according to an Olympic official who asked not to be named. Media workers will now have to be put up in private hotels at huge additional cost to the building contractors.

One organiser of the event said: “It is a big problem, you have no idea,” he said.

Authorities had promised the security would be in unintrusive but the rising threat from Islamist terrorists based in the nearby North Caucasus republics prompted a heightened state of alert.

An estimated 70,000 policemen, soldiers and other security personnel have been deployed around the greater Sochi area, with strict security and access procedures. Warships have been deployed off the coast, drones patrol the skies, and anti-aircraft missiles and special forces soldiers guard the perimeter of a vast security zone extending from the Black Sea up to the down-hill venues in the Caucasus mountains.

Visitors and Olympic staff have found their movements restricted in unexpected ways.

To enter railway stations and Olympic venues visitors must pass through check points equipped with x-ray machines, metal detectors and explosive material scanners manned by stern-faced security.

International staff arriving to work at the games carrying luggage were surprised to be refused access to the city’s gleaming new airport express trains because suitcases and rucksacks are not allowed on board. They were directed to buses and taxis instead.

Olympics workers from around the world saw their registration to the high security Olympic Park blocked since Friday because their names had been wrongly translated into the cyrillic alphabet.

“Come back tomorrow, the system takes 24 hours to recognise the corrections,” admission clerks told them.

Police reportedly confiscated mobile phones and tablets from spectators arriving to view rehearsals for this Friday night’s opening ceremony, to prevent images of the spectacular show leaking.

Meanwhile, two human rights activists have launched legal action against the organisers after being denied access to the games, in what they say is a clear use of the “anti-terror” security measures to silence inconvenient critics.

Semyon Simonov, a Sochi-based migrants rights advocate, and Nikolai Levshits, a Moscow-based campaigner for prisoners’ rights, submitted a joint suit to the Adler district court in Sochi on Friday after they were denied spectator passes.

Mr Simonov, a trainee lawyer who runs a drop in legal advice centre for migrant workers hired to work on the Olympic construction projects, bought a 1,000 rubble (£20) ticket to the Olympic ice hockey tournament in mid January.

Days later he received a text message telling him his simultaneous application for a “fan’s passport” - the security clearance document required to actually enter the Olympic Park - had been rejected, making his ticket useless.

“Myself, my wife and some friends did six applications at the same time through an intermediary. Mine was the only one to be rejected,” said Mr Simyonov in an interview in his Sochi office.