The International Olympic Committee has moved to calm fears that athletes would be “blown up” by terrorists at the Winter Games after several countries, including Britain, received emails and letters threatening their safety.

The IOC and British Olympic Association moved swiftly to discredit the legitimacy of the correspondence that they and other national Olympic committees had been sent, which were dismissed by the IOC as “a random message from a member of the public”.

The German, Italian, Hungarian, Slovenian and Slovakian Olympic associations all confirmed that they had received the malicious communication written in both English and Russian and warning them against travelling to Sochi.

The BOA confirmed that it had received what appears to be the same threat in an email in the past fortnight and had concluded it did not represent a risk to its delegation following discussions with experts.

Asked what was written in the email, a spokesman said: “I’m not going to get into the exact nature of the correspondence but some of it lacks credibility.”

The IOC also refused to disclose the contents of the messages, saying in a statement: “The IOC takes security very seriously and passes on any credible information to the relevant security services. However, in this case, it seems like the email sent to a number of NOCs contains no threat and appears to be a random message from a member of the public.”

Despite the assurances, the correspondence briefly caused alarm and underlined nervousness over security at the £30 billion event on which Russian President Vladimir Putin’s legacy may depend.

Suicide bombers killed at least 34 people in a southern city last month, Islamist militants have threatened to attack the Winter Games and security forces are hunting a woman suspected of planning a suicide bombing and of being in Sochi already.

Zsigmond Nagy, director of international relations at the Hungarian Olympic Committee, claimed that the letter received by his country said “persons attending the Olympic Games might be blown up”.

Nagy also quoted IOC officials saying that the letters had been sent by someone living outside Russia who had carried out such hoaxes before, but did not identify the person.

Officials in Italy, Germany, Slovakia and Slovenia said their national committees had also received threats and all had passed them on to police.

The IOC has said that it is confident that the Games, opening in Sochi on the shores of the Black Sea on Feb 7, would be safe, and Putin has put about 37,000 security personnel on combat alert in the resort and increased security nationwide.

Even so, Moscow has failed to dampen concern that it will not be able to guarantee visitors’ and competitors’ safety, despite the most elaborate security preparations for an Olympics.

It emerged on Wednesday that US speed skater Tucker Fredricks had asked his family to stay at home because of security fears, while athletes union UNI Sport PRO questioned whether anti-doping whereabouts information could fall into the wrong hands because of the possible mishandling of personal data.

Head of department Walter Palmer said: “Here you have, from our point of view, a transfer of really sensitive whereabouts data to a country where that could pose a real security threat. What a dream for a terrorist if they can access that information.”

A militant leader, Doku Umarov, has called for insurgents fighting for an Islamist state in Russia’s North Caucasus to attack Sochi – which lies on the western edge of the Caucasus Mountains where the insurgency is focused.

Security concerns were heightened by the suicide bombings last month in Volgograd, a southern Russian city which serves as a gateway to the North Caucasus, and by a video in which the Islamist militant group which claimed responsibility for the attacks threatened more violence.

In Sochi, which plans to host hundreds of thousands of visitors during the Games, security forces are searching for a woman called Ruzanna Ibragimova, 23, who they suspect may be planning a suicide attack. A letter from Russia’s Federal Security Services to local police said she was the widow of a slain Islamist militant and is believed to have recently left her home in Dagestan, in the turbulent, mainly Muslim North Caucasus.