Sustainability is one of the three pillars of Olympic Agenda 2020 alongside credibility and youth. In line with its recommendations, the IOC has developed a Sustainability Strategy. Based on the responsibility of the IOC as an organization, as the owner of the Olympic Games, and as the leader of the Olympic Movement, it focuses on infrastructure and natural sites, sourcing and resource management, mobility, workforce, and climate.

IOC President Thomas Bach on the IOC Sustainability Strategy





The overarching mission of the International Olympic Committee is to put sport at the service of humanity. As an organisation dedicated to making the world a better place through sport, the IOC wholeheartedly believes that sport has an essential role to play in modern society. In our fragile world that has never been more interdependent and in need of common solutions, the IOC wants to do its part to make the sporting world an agent for positive change.

This is why sustainability, together with credibility and youth, is one of the three key pillars of Olympic Agenda 2020, the strategic roadmap for the future of the Olympic Movement. Olympic Agenda 2020 places great emphasis on incorporating sustainability in all aspects of the Olympic Games and encourages all stakeholders of the Olympic Movement to include sustainability in their daily operations.

"The IOC Sustainability Strategy will fundamentally shape the working practices of the IOC, the Olympic Games and the Olympic Movement."

Thomas Bach





The relevance of sport in society was acknowledged in 2015 by the United Nations, when sport was highlighted as an “important enabler” to achieve the ambitious agenda of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. This recognition has only strengthened our determination to make sustainability an integral part of all IOC activities.

Building on Olympic Agenda 2020 and developed in close cooperation with many stakeholders and partners, the IOC Sustainability Strategy will fundamentally shape the working practices of the IOC, the Olympic Games and the Olympic Movement. From the design and construction of sports facilities and the way we manage resources, to valuing the natural environment and health and well-being of our people, all of our decisions will be informed by the sustainability principles that are highlighted here.

As the role and relevance of sport in today’s society continues to grow, we know that we can only make progress in cooperation and partnership with others. This is why I call on all stakeholders to join with us and work together to build a better, more sustainable world through sport.

Thomas Bach