The outgoing head of Wada, David Howman, believes new information from Sochi will be crucial and that sport must take innovative steps to tackle doping

The departing head of the World Anti‑Doping Agency has predicted that an inquiry into Russian doping will be “very revealing” in yielding new information that will affect the decision on whether to let their athletes compete at the Rio Olympics.

In an interview to mark the end of his 13-year tenure as Wada director general, David Howman has also defended its treatment of the whistleblowers who finally led to Russia’s ban and called on sport and governments to rethink their approaches to anti-doping.

Howman, a no-nonsense New Zealander who has been warning for years that sport and governments need to do more to support Wada on its anti‑doping mandate, leaves at a time when the organisation itself is being rocked by criticism.

Russia accused of ‘state-sponsored doping’ as Wada calls for athletics ban Read more

He predicted that Professor Richard McLaren’s new report, commissioned by Wada, into the recent claims made by the lab director Grigory Rodchenkov in the New York Times, about the details of how the anti-doping process was subverted in Sochi in 2014, would be of much wider significance.

“I have total confidence in McLaren and the team around him,” he says. “One thing I’ve got pretty strong confidence in is that Rodchenkov wouldn’t have been reported as strongly as it was by the New York Times if there wasn’t corroborative evidence showing it was true. You can almost bet your boots that he has corroborative witnesses or corroborative evidence showing it’s true.”

Howman also reveals that information collected by McLaren will be made available to the International Association of Athletics Federations before Russia faces what the IAAF president, Sebastian Coe, described as its “come to Jesus moment” next month. McLaren’s report is due to be delivered shortly after the IAAF meets in Vienna but Howman suggests any key intelligence will be shared before they make the decision on whether to ban Russia from the Rio Games.

“I think there is going to be a lot more water under the bridge before 17 June. The new investigation we’re conducting could end up being very revealing in terms of other information,” Howman says.

“You have to remember Rodchenkov was the director of the laboratory for the world athletics championships in 2013, for the world swimming championships, for the Paralympics. There are other events for which the samples would have been taken and stored. I don’t know what the outcome will be but if there’s anything that will be helpful to the IAAF, I’m sure they will receive it.

“We have to sit back and say we have faith in the IAAF making the right decision based on the information they have.”

Ask him for his own view on whether Russia should compete and Howman will say it is a matter for the IAAF. But it is not necessary to read too far between the lines to see that he believes it should face the consequences of its actions. “Sometimes you get tarred with the brush of your country when your country has offended rules that you might not have agreed to. But did you put up your hand and say something?” he says.

“Did you talk to the Independent Commission we ran and say that you were a clean athlete. I think you can draw as many conclusions from inactivity during that period as you can from activity.”

Although it was Dick Pound’s independent report, commissioned by Wada, that led to the uncovering of systemic state-sponsored doping in Russia, the recent revelation that the whistleblowers Vitaly and Yuliya Stepanov sent upto 200 emails to Wada before finally contacting the media has raised new questions about its processes and commitment. Howman says: “I don’t mind criticism at any time. You feed off criticism and do something about it. It would grieve me if we got to a point where the athletes didn’t have faith in what we’re doing. So we’ve got to give a lot of attention to that and to make sure that if we’ve lost it, we recover it.”

His reference to the athletes is significant, given calls by the Wada athlete’s commission – which Howman played a key role in creating – to extend investigations into Russian athletics to cover all sports.

Wada has argued that until recent changes to its regulations, its rules at the time didn’t allow it to do any more than alert the Russian authorities or the IAAF to the claims made by the Stepanovs – who ultimately provided the material that allowed German documentary maker Hajo Seppelt to uncover the depths of Russian deception.

In the end, Howman argues, fears for their safety outweighed the value in doing so. In short, he says, the situation was more complex than it might appear on the surface.

“You have to read all the emails to understand totally. But there were a number of emails. He [Stepanov] certainly made contact with a number of people inside Wada trying to get things done in a better way.

“It wasn’t corroborated by anybody, it wasn’t a situation where we felt he should be on the chopping block by himself – the only people we could make him available to were the Russian authorities or the IAAF and the IAAF didn’t come to the table for two or three years,” Howman says.

“If you look at it in terms of the overall picture, there was a feeling we didn’t want to risk his health and welfare. We interviewed him offshore, we had an independent investigator talk with him. There just wasn’t enough.

“Until we got a little bit more, then we couldn’t do anything – we didn’t have the power of investigation. It was a bit of a rock and a hard place scenario.”

Instead, he says, Wada’s executive concentrated on trying to strip the now infamous Moscow lab of its accreditation – a move that ultimately failed because the committee taking the decision decided against doing so.

“We came down in favour of trying to protect him and tackling it in other ways, like the lab. We thought the lab would lose its accreditation. It didn’t. We did our best and he was still living in Russia at that stage. There was a human call that needed to be taken,” he says.

In 2013, the year of the world athletics championships in Russia, Howman warned in the Guardian that the problem of doping was reaching epidemic proportions and was getting “too big for sport to manage”, such were the criminal elements attaching themselves to sport.

He also warned that athletics was on the brink of going the way of cycling in being corrupted by systemic cheating. “What I was predicting five or six years ago has happened. It’s happened for two or three reasons. One, you can’t hide the truth for ever. Two, the pressure on us is to look at the quality of programmes and the quality of individuals within programmes. That means you catch up with those who don’t exhibit that quality,” he says.

“In addition to that, what has happened is the best thing that could have happened to anti-doping. All of a sudden, we’re testing the commitment of those who support us and support clean athletes. We wait to see how strong that commitment is. If it’s not strong, then those who gave it are not worthy of the positions they hold. And those who say they support the clean athletes obviously don’t.”

Howman says he takes no pleasure in being proved right but calls for some recognition of the fact that Wada, with its 70 staff and its annual budget of £19m (half from the International Olympic Committee , half from governments), is only as strong as those it oversees.

“Those critics have to realise we run an agency of 70 people, none of whom are told they have to go and personally investigate things all around the world. We don’t have that capacity. We are very reliant on the people who do the work at national level,” he says. “We are responsible for overseeing the rules and the way they’re implemented but we can’t have eyes and ears in every part of the world every day.

“You are as strong as your weakest link and the weakest link we have in terms of our rules are the people who collect the urine. Can we ensure that every doping control officer is as honest as the day is long? No. Can we ensure they all have unimpeachable values? No.”

One idea he has been advocating for some time is the possibility of sports testing one another’s samples and different nations testing one another’s samples. “Probably the best way to do it would be for tennis to test in hockey and France to test in England. But even if you do that, you are still relying on those doing the grunt work, collecting the samples, delivering them to the labs and so on,” Howman says.

“And you’ve still got exposure to those wider elements – I’ve been saying this for a number of years, that the criminal element that has pervaded sport is increasing daily. And nobody seems to listen to that. So you’re not dealing with nice good guys, you’re dealing with really bad guys.”

He says he is disappointed that there has been no response from sport to the idea recently floated again by his president Sir Craig Reedie for there to be some kind of levy on broadcasting and sponsorship income to help fund a significant increase in the amount invested in anti-doping.

Reedie himself has come in for fierce criticism from some, seen as too clubbable and too conflicted given his companion role as an IOC vice-president. Howman treads carefully. “I’ve had three presidents, all of whom have had different styles. My current president has a different style to the others. He is being criticised a fair bit at the moment and we’ll see how he adapts to that.”

Howman also repeats his call for governments and sport to invest in a wider integrity unit to fight related issues such as match fixing and to avoid resources being cannibalised.

There is also frustration that the ongoing legal tussle over the Operation Puerto blood bags in Spain will outlast his tenure.

But there is also a tinge of relief that he will no longer be the one making the calls that too often go unheeded. Thirteen years after arriving at Wada’s headquarters in Montreal for what was supposed to be a maximum of three, Howman is returning to New Zealand and the independent bar – but will carry on watching sport with a mixture of cynicism and optimism. “People take shortcuts in every area of life. But sport is becoming more of an area to take shortcuts because of the amount of money in sport. You’re going to attract greed, you’re going to attract the bad guys because everyone wants to make their fortune in a hurry,” he concludes.

“What happens to the athlete at the end of their career? They get dumped. That doesn’t make sense from an athlete perspective or a societal perspective. Somebody has to do the yelling from the rooftops and I’ve been trying to do that.”

The IOC released a statement on Wednesday night in which it pledged to double its budget for pre-Olympic testing and focus on countries whose testing programmes are deemed non-compliant by Wada. It will also further extend the re-analysis programme for Beijing 2008 and London 2012.

The board said: “We are taking further decisive action to protect the clean athletes at the Olympic Games 2016.”