With today marking 99 days until the opening ceremony of the most expensive Winter Olympics in history, construction companies have been accused of not paying their workers, bussing in illegal labourers and taking scant care of their existing employees as Russia rushes to complete its preparations.

The estimated 95,000 workers who have laboured on the projects have seen little of the $51 billion (£31 billion) that has been poured into the project.

“They kept promising it would be next week, then the week after that,” said Viktor Spinu, 30, a manual labourer from Moldova, who has not been paid since March.

“Now they’ve just laid us off and brought in new workers. Yugoslavs, I saw the buses coming in.”

Mr Spinu claims that he has 100 colleagues who are still waiting to be paid a total of 15 million roubles (£300,000) – many of them, like him, are migrant workers from the former Soviet Union.

The work was hard, but the salary decent. He earned 40,000 roubles (£800) a month – well above the nominal Russian national average of around 30,000.

But in April his employer stopped paying wages, saying that it had not received its own payment from Russian Railways.

”For those without documents, there is not much that can be done,” said Semyon Simonov of the Memorial human rights group, who runs an advice centre for migrant labourers in the city. Mr Spinu is far from unique, and he unlikely to ever see his missing wages, although the company did end up paying those who had work permits and contracts – documents that Mr Semyonov describes as “a real rarity.”

Workers lay turfs outside the media centre (Roland Oliphant)

Mr Semyonov’s office has received appeals for help from 1,500 people since it opened in July 2012.

In another case the management of a subcontractor simply vanished overnight, leaving workers unpaid, and the job — accommodation for Paralympic officials — unfinished. Russian prosecutors trying to track them down found a string of false addresses.

“They’ve probably fled the country,” he said.

Mr Semyonov estimated about 80 per cent of the workers involved on the project are casually employed illegal immigrants, who are especially vulnerable to unscrupulous employers.

But it is not only foreigners who are affected. Earlier this month a Russian worker declared a hunger strike and sewed his own lips together in a bid to shame his employers into paying two months’ wages.

The exterior of the ice hockey stadium (Roland Oliphant)

And with only three months to go before the opening ceremony, the Black Sea resort remains a building site.

From the subtropical shoreline up to the chilly mountain valleys of the Western Caucasus, the air reverberates to the thump of pneumatic drills and the whine of metal cutting tools as workers scramble to complete the infrastructure and city improvement projects in time for the games.

The sporting venues are now complete, but several projects were plagued with over-runs and delays. The ski jump had to be redone several times and its cost soared from £24.8m to £165m, prompting Vladimir Putin to fire a Russian Olympic Committee vice president whose company had the contract.

Yet government critics say such workers as Mr Spinu have encountered just the tip of an iceberg of corruption and kickbacks that has claimed at least half of the Olympics vast $51 billion bill

The speed skating stadium (Roland Oliphant)

“I can only say we didn’t overspend on anything, it was all budgeted for,” said Andrei Markov, the head of the Laura biathlon centre, which was built by Gazprom – the state energy company, when asked about spiralling costs. “What kind of financial worries could there be when it has been guaranteed by the president?”

In scale, ambition, and the mobilisation of state resources, the Sochi Olympic project resembles nothing less than a Soviet-era five-year plan.

State corporations from Gazprom to the national rail monopoly and the country’s largest bank have been roped in to shoulder their part of the effort.

Even the country’s oligarchs have been dragooned into doing their bit. The Olympic Village has been built by Oleg Deripaska’s Basic Element, while metals and mining magnate Vladimir Potanin’s Interross has contributed an alpine resort at the heart of the downhill venues.

And like Soviet planners, the organisers like to boast in statistics: favourites include that the project will see 206 venues built and over 367 kilometres of roads and 201 kilometres of railway line laid. Two Eiffel towers’ worth of steel went into the speed and figure skating stadium, and 450,000 cubic metres of snow have been stockpiled as insurance against a warm winter.

According to the organisers, almost 95,000 labours were employed on the Olympic construction project at its peak, 8-10 percent of whom were foreigners fr 26 countries.

But Mr Semyonov said that the official figures could only have been arrived by counting a tiny minority of migrant workers who have work permits and contracts. In reality, he estimates, up to 80 percent of the workforce is made up of casually employed illegals.

Olympstroi, the state corporation overseeing the vast construction effort, said employment law was strictly enforced.

"Strict obedience to Russian law, including protection of Russian citizens' and immigrant workers' rights at the Olympic construction sites, is enforced and controlled by multiple government agencies, including the Prosecutor General's office, its local offices in Krasnodar region, Krasnodar region's Labor inspection agency and also by the Russian Federal migration service.

"Any worker who has concerns about violations of his rights is encouraged to contact the organizations mentioned above and to report the problem. All reported violations have been properly addressed and dealt with as per the Russian law," the company said in a statement.