Facebook Twitter Pinterest CBC/Radio-Canada, the official rights holder broadcaster of the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games has chosen the TVA Sports Network as one of the Official Cable Broadcasters involved in presenting the event. The ...

× CBC/Radio-Canada, the official rights holder broadcaster of the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games has chosen the TVA Sports Network as one of the Official Cable Broadcasters involved in presenting the event. The agreement was announced by CBC/Radio-Canada executive vice-president Louis Lalande and TVA Group's president and CEO Pierre Dion. (CNW Group/Canadian Broadcasting Corporation)



Tweet this release: bit.ly/10Pu458

MONTREAL, May 2, 2013 /CNW Telbec/ - Today, CBC/Radio-Canada, the official rights holder broadcaster of the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games, and TVA Sports announce that an agreement has been reached to provide TVA Sports access to broadcast portions of CBC/Radio-Canada-produced Olympic programming during Sochi 2014 in French.

"In acquiring the broadcast rights to the Sochi Olympics, one of CBC/Radio-Canada's primary objectives was to connect as many Canadians as possible with this unparalleled sporting event." said CBC/Radio-Canada executive vice-president Louis Lalande. "Our agreement with TVA Sports represents a major milestone in helping us achieve that objective."

"We're very proud that the TVA Sports network was chosen to be one of CBC/Radio-Canada's Official Cable Broadcasters and actively involved in presenting the largest sporting event on the planet. TVA Sports will be giving viewers the opportunity to get an up-close look at this major international competition and follow how Canada's and Quebec's athletes fare in their Olympic disciplines," adds TVA Group's president and CEO Pierre Dion.

"We're pleased to have extended our relationship with TVA Sports as they become an Official Cable Broadcaster for Sochi 2014," said Jeffrey Orridge, Head of Sports Properties and General Manager, Olympics at CBC/Radio-Canada. "This agreement provides an even greater opportunity for Canadians to enjoy every minute of the Olympic experience in either official language."

Details about content to be aired by all channels will be available in the coming months.

CBC/Radio-Canada is the place to be as we count down to Sochi 2014. With coverage across all platforms — including TV, radio, online and mobile — Canadians can connect with the biggest stories and the latest content whenever and wherever they want it. Through world-class storytelling and the best performance coverage available, CBC/Radio-Canada will introduce viewers to Canadian athletes poised to take on the world in 2014. Canadians can engage with CBC leading up to and throughout the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games online in English at cbc.ca/olympics as well as on Twitter @cbcolympics (#cbcolympics) and at facebook.com/cbcolympics and in French at Radio-Canada.ca/olympiques and on Twitter at @RC_Sports #RColympiques and on Facebook at facebook.com/radiocanada.sports.

About CBC/Radio-Canada

CBC/Radio-Canada is Canada's national public broadcaster and one of its largest cultural institutions. The Corporation is a leader in reaching Canadians on new platforms and delivers a comprehensive range of radio, television, Internet, and satellite-based services. Deeply rooted in the regions, CBC/Radio-Canada is the only domestic broadcaster to offer diverse regional and cultural perspectives in English, French and eight Aboriginal languages.

About CBC's New In-House Publicity Team

CBC's new team of in-house publicists are delivering a comprehensive publicity service for all CBC programming and events. For a complete list of publicity contacts and for more information including series synopses, press releases, hi-res images, video clips and bios, please visit the new CBC Media Centre at cbc.ca/mediacentre

Image with caption: "CBC/Radio-Canada, the official rights holder broadcaster of the Sochi 2014 Olympic Winter Games has chosen the TVA Sports Network as one of the Official Cable Broadcasters involved in presenting the event. The agreement was announced by CBC/Radio-Canada executive vice-president Louis Lalande and TVA Group's president and CEO Pierre Dion. (CNW Group/Canadian Broadcasting Corporation)". Image available at: http://photos.newswire.ca/images/download/20130502_C3004_PHOTO_EN_26287.jpg

SOURCE: Canadian Broadcasting Corporation

For further information:

CBC/Radio-Canada

Renee Weekes, Senior Publicist, CBC, English Communications Services

Renee.Weekes@cbc.ca 416-205-2053 (Office) 416-729-7945 (Mobile)

Mark Pichette, Director, Public Relations, Promotions and Partnerships, French Services Communications Services

Marc.Pichette@cbc.ca 514-597-4140