Photo: imago sportfotodienst/ Globallookpress.com

Russian figure skater Adelina Sotnikova could be stripped of Olympic gold in Sochi. Her name is in the report of the Commission of Richard McLaren and she is accused of tampering with the doping tests during the Games

In the Commission’s report Richard McLaren have information about what doping test Sotnikova was opened. If it is proved that sample Olympic champion had indeed been manipulated, Sotnikova will face the deprivation of gold. It is reported by La Gazzetta Dello Sport.

La Gazzetta Dello Sport claims that a number of suspects were also Tatiana Volosozhar and Ksenia Stolbova representing figure skating in pairs and dance. If the suspicions are justified, Russia is facing the loss of the team gold and medals in separate kinds.

McLaren unveiled the second part of the report on 9 December. Thereafter, the international Olympic Committee announced the initiation of an investigation against 28 Russian participants of the Olympic games in Sochi.

At this time, the names of six skiers who were suspended from participation in competitions on the basis of this report. Evgeniy Belov, Alexander Legkov, Alexey Petukhov, Maxim Vylegzhanin, Yulia Ivanova and Evgenia Shapovalova confirmed their suspension. Of these medals in Sochi won Legkov and Vylegzhanin – Legkov became the Olympic champion, Vylegzhanin won three silver.

In addition, the international biathlon Union announced the suspension of two Russian biathletes participating in the Olympic games in Sochi. The names of the athletes were not named, but La Gazzetta Dello Sport reported that we are talking about Olga Vilukhina and Yana Romanova. In Sochi Vilukhina won silver in sprint, and both women joined the relay team, which won the 2014 silver.

30 Dec the international Federation of bobsleigh and skeleton announced the suspension of four Russian skeleton sliders. The names of the athletes were not named. In total, the national team of Russia in skeleton at the Olympics in Sochi included six athletes: Nikita Tregubov, Alexander Tretyakov, Sergey Chudinov, Elena Nikitina, Maria Orlova and Olga Potylitsina. Two of them, Tretyakov and Nikitina, won at those Olympics medals: Tretyakov became the Olympic champion, Nikitin won the silver.