The sport is little known on this continent. But in Sweden it is a part of the national culture, drawing 30,000 or more to the annual championship game. In Russia more than one million people play bandy, with a professional league that pays top players up to $500,000 a year to play in crumbling Stalin-era outdoor stadiums before crowds of 200 to 15,000.

“I’ve been very fortunate to experience all of that,” said Chris Middlebrook, who started as a player in 1981 and now divides time between his law career and being the United States team’s head coach. “Through bandy, I’ve been able to meet people and see places I’d never otherwise have seen: Siberia while the cold war was still on, Budapest, Helsinki, full stadiums in the dead of winter cheering us on like rock stars. And then I come back home, and almost no one knows what this sport is.”

Photo

In the United States, perhaps 300 men, 50 women and 200 youngsters play bandy. All of them live in the Twin Cities, except for a handful from Duluth who drive down on weekends.

Most of the national team players took up bandy after playing college hockey, often because the rules governing contact resemble those of soccer, shoulder-to-shoulder challenges only. Full-on body checking is prohibited.

“After I graduated I played in men’s hockey leagues, and I always came home bleeding,” said Rick Haney, a former Harvard hockey player and a captain of the American bandy team. “Then I tried bandy, and as soon as I stepped out on the ice I knew I was home.”

The appeal of bandy goes beyond safety considerations. The game requires more skating stamina than hockey because there is more ice to cover (7 to 11 miles per 90-minute game) and far fewer substitutions. It also requires the ability to maneuver at high speed. Jere Lehtinen, the longtime forward for the Dallas Stars and Finland, is among the Nordic N.H.L. players who have credited their success in hockey to the skating skills they learned as youth bandy players.

Unlike Russia and Sweden, whose rosters are filled with professionals, the United States must use part-timers and some older players. Haney, a 44-year-old banker, played a couple of seasons in Sweden and Norway. But younger players who grew up with the Roseville program — like John Arundel and Mike Hosfield, both 24, and Jon Keseley, 25 — have gone to bandy camps in Sweden and have played in top leagues there.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Bandy’s fun, it’s fast and we go to some amazing places,” said Hosfield, who works in international sales.

The International Olympic Committee recognizes the sport because the requisite 25 nations have bandy federations (about 14 actually play regularly), but it does not have sufficient standing for the Olympics. The Russians, who will stage the 2014 Olympics in Sochi, are pushing the I.O.C. to give bandy some role at those Games.

Photo

“The Russian Olympic committee very much wants to see bandy at Sochi, and they have the support of Vladimir Putin,” said Magnus Skold, the main organizer for the United States team and a vice president of the Federation of International Bandy, referring to the Russian prime minister. “There’s a very good chance that they can make it happen.”

Dutch paintings from the 16th century regularly show scenes of people striking a ball on the ice, and at least one, by Pieter Bruegel the Elder, may show skaters chasing after a ball.

The earliest record of a bandy club, Bury Fen in England, dates to 1813. In those days the fens of East Anglia regularly froze in winter, giving rise to a lively culture of distance skating and bandy. In 1853, a game, referred to as “hockey on the ice,” was played at Windsor Castle with Prince Albert in goal. One of the earliest soccer clubs, and one still playing today, was founded in 1865 as Nottingham Forest Football and Bandy Club.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The rules of bandy were codified in 1882, seven years after the rules for hockey were codified in Montreal. While hockey spread across Canada and the northern United States, bandy spread across Northern Europe, becoming a popular wintertime game from the Netherlands to Prague to St. Petersburg, Russia.

But by the late 1920s, warmer winters and the more manageable logistics of hockey — with about half the players on a rink about half the size — took their toll. Bandy disappeared from England and the Netherlands, and the Czechs switched to hockey.

The last holdouts were the Nordic countries, and especially Soviet Russia. Dinamo Moscow was that nation’s top bandy club in 1946 when it staged an exhibition of “Canadian hockey,” which caught on quickly. The Soviets became so good at hockey so fast not because of any government-backed effort, as Westerners tend to believe, but because Russians had played bandy through long, cold winters for decades.

Bandy, known as ball hockey or Russian hockey, is still popular there today, mainly in Arctic cities like Arkhangelsk and across Siberia. But this year’s world championship is being staged in Moscow at a six-year-old indoor stadium, the 10,000-seat Krylatskoye Arena.

Photo

Russia has won 23 championships, and Sweden, the defending champion, has 9. They could meet in Sunday’s final if Russia beats Kazakhstan and Sweden defeats Finland in Saturday’s semifinals.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Americans face a Saturday showdown against Canada, after losing all five of their group matches. But the United States did respectably well, scoring 22 goals over all, led by midfielder Darren Richardson, who had 7. If the Americans defeat Canada, which finished first in the lower group, they will stay in the top group for next year’s tournament.

The United States roster includes a couple of dual-passport holders. Mikael Sandberg, 37, a former professional in Sweden and Russia, is now a business consultant in Minneapolis. Jasper Felder, 38, son of an American serviceman and a Swedish mother, lives and plays professionally in Sweden.

The team also carries a former N.H.L. player new to bandy, goalie Robb Stauber, a former Hobey Baker Award winner at the University of Minnesota who spent parts of four seasons with the Los Angeles Kings.

Stauber, 42, who played his first bandy last month, was enlisted when another goalie could not get out of his restaurant job to go to Moscow.

Stauber now has to learn how to defend a much larger net without a stick against 100-mile-per-hour shots that sometimes curve.

“As a hockey goalie, I used my stick a lot, and that acts as a kind of ballast that helps you keep your balance,” said Stauber, who allowed 14 goals in the one game he played, against Sweden. “I think once I get used to not having a stick, I’ll have similar balance.”

Participating in the world championship was not about winning and losing, Middlebrook said as he stood rinkside in the cold, wearing a Mongolian hat he picked up at a recent tournament.

“I was just a former Division III hockey player from Gustavus Adolphus College when I happened across bandy, and because of it I’ve seen some fascinating parts of the world,” he said. “This sport has been like a fairy godmother to me.”