Participants in a flashmob marking the start of the 500-day countdown to the 2014 Winter Olympics. (Photo: Igor Yakunin, AP)

Sochi celebrated 500 days until the Opening Ceremony of the 2014 Winter Olympics with a national sports festival, various flash mobs and the release of the official slogan for the upcoming Games, "Hot. Cool. Yours."

Sochi 2014 president and CEO Dmitry Chernyshenko explained that the slogan is about a diverse Russia, then launched into a word-by-word exegesis of the phrase.

"'Hot' indicates sports passions and the Games' venue, he said. "'Cool' stands for the time of the year and for how Russia is perceived by the rest of the world, and 'Yours' means shorter distances and the inclusive nature of the event."

Double meanings! Brilliant! What a neat slogan, with "neat" indicating that the slogan is both orderly and cool.

Then again, wordplay aside, "Hot. Cool. Yours." sounds like anything but an Olympic motto. It're more like:

1. A failed Stuart Scott catchphrase.

2, Rejected marketing campaign for McDonald's 1980s flop, the McDLT. ("Keep the hot side hot, and the cool side cool," was the actual one.)

3. The title of Katy Perry's next album.

The good news is that this is probably the last you'll ever hear of it. Do you know what London's Olympic slogan was? Neither does anyone else. Slogans like this are marketing gimmicks designed to get Sochi's 500-day countdown some ink in newspapers and on websites. (So, good job, Sochi. You win.) The slogan will be used in the lead-up to the Games and throughout the event, but you probably won't notice.

London's slogan was "Inspire a Generation," by the way. Vancouver had "With Glowing Hearts." Beijing went with "One World, One Dream."

None of them make sense and none were heavily used in the international branding on the Games. Expect the same for "Hot. Cool. Yours."

And by the way: "With Glowing Hearts? That doesn't make sense on any level unless it was the tagline for an Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom sequel

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/NOWVPv