The family of an off-duty police officer killed in the Manchester Arena attack have said she would want people to continue their lives without fear.



DC Elaine McIver, 43, from the Cheshire force, an officer for 20 years, was attending the concert while off duty with her husband and two children.

Her family paid tribute to her as the last of the 22 victims was named as 15-year-old Megan Hurley, from Halewood in Liverpool. Her brother was seriously injured.

McIver was “an effervescent and outgoing personality”, her family said. Her husband, Paul, remains critically ill.

The chief constable of Cheshire police, Simon Byrne, said the thoughts of the whole force were with her family.

“Friends who knew her well have described her as big hearted, bubbly and a positive person,” said Byrne. “We are supporting her family at this very difficult time, and will be providing support for friends and colleagues from the constabulary as we come to terms with the loss of an officer in such tragic and heart-rending circumstances. We will not let evil win.”



Police say specialist officers have been supporting the families. The victims included a primary schoolgirl, teenagers, mothers, fathers and young men. Nine girls and young women, aged from eight to 19, were among the dead.

It was the worst terrorist incident in the UK since the 7 July attacks in 2005. Many families announced the news of their loss on social media. Others paid tribute in statements issued through the police. Postmortem examinations will be carried out over the next four days

McIver’s family said she was a woman who loved life. “Despite what has happened to her, she would want us all to carry on regardless and not be frightened by fear tactics. Instead she regularly urged us all to rise up against it,” they said.

The family of Michelle Kiss, a mother of three from Lancashire, announced that her life had been taken in the “most traumatic way imaginable”. Her youngest daughter, Millie, who went to the concert with her, survived.

Among others identified were a 14-year-old Cheshire schoolgirl, Nell Jones, and a “bubbly and kind” 51-year-old school receptionist, Jane Tweddle-Taylor.

Courtney Boyle, 19, was killed at the concert along with her stepfather, Philip Tron, 32. Her mother said she had made her “so proud” and her “gorgeous crazy” partner had made her world “a happy place”.

Olivia Campbell, a 15-year-old from Bury, Kelly Brewster, a 32-year-old office worker from Sheffield, and Martyn Hett, a 29-year-old PR manager from Stockport, also died.



Eilidh MacLeod, a 14-year-old from Barra in the Outer Hebrides, was among the dead. Her parents described her as a beautiful, intelligent, popular and talented daughter”.

The deaths of Alison Howe and Lisa Lees, friends who were waiting at the venue to pick up their daughters, were confirmed on Wednesday, as were those of Angelika and Marcin Klis, Polish nationals living in York who had also been waiting to collect their daughters.

Eilidh MacLeod, 14

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Eilidh MacLeod

Eilidh and her friend, Laura MacIntyre, from Barra, an island of just 1,000 people in the Outer Hebrides, had been missing since the explosion at the Ariana Grande concert on Monday night.

On Friday, her parents paid tribute to her, calling her their “beautiful, intelligent, popular and talented daughter”. They said she was also a loving sister, without whom they were at a loss.

“Eilidh loved nothing more than spending time with those she loved, both family and friends alike. She loved socialising whether through social media or spending time with them down on the beaches of both Barra and Vatersay. Her love of music was unsurpassed and she enjoyed her time playing, travelling and competing in the Pipe Bands immensely.

They also thanked the emergency services and the communities in Manchester, Scotland and elsewhere in the world who have helped them.

“Messages and tributes to our Eilidh by her friends have given us great comfort and we wish to thank you all. The offers of help and support have been truly overwhelming and greatly appreciated.

“Eilidh and Laura were so excited about going to the concert together but what should have been the perfect ending to a fantastic trip ended so tragically. We continue to have Laura and her family in our thoughts and pray that she makes a full recovery. As a family, we would also like to offer our support and condolences to all the other innocent victims who have been needlessly killed in this attack; and to the survivors in hospitals around Manchester.

“Losing Eilidh is undoubtedly the most difficult time of our lives and we ask that the media please respect our privacy during this time.”

Eilidh had been thought to have been unaccounted for until police confirmed on Wednesday that all the victims and casualties had been identified. Her close friend Laura, 15, remains critically ill in a Manchester hospital with severe burns.



Annag Maclean, headteacher at Barra’s Castlebay community school, said pupils and the island’s community had been left “in shock, feeling numb and struggling to come to terms with it”.

“Our thoughts and prayers are with Eilidh and Laura, their family and friends as they struggle to cope,” she said.

Angus MacNeil, until recently MP for the Western Isles, said islanders on Barra “feel sick to the pit of their stomach, very, very sad, and feel just so much sorrow for their parents. Every home has felt this. Everybody is aching sorely and has a sense of loss this morning.”

MacNeil spoke to Laura’s father, Micheal, a family friend, on Wednesday. Laura had treatment for severe burns and other injuries and was slowly making progress. “It’s early days but each little step which has been taken seems to be optimistic, from a very low base,” he said.



Lisa Lees, 47

Lisa Lees was confirmed dead on Wednesday. Lee Hunter, her brother, wrote on Facebook: “For those who don’t know, Lisa is gone but never, ever forgotten. I love you Lisa. I’ll miss you so much.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Lisa Lees

“You were the best mum in the universe and the bestest friend that I could ask for,” her daughter, India Lees, said. “You always cheered me up when I was upset and have always been there for me. You have the most beautiful smile and most caring eyes. You are loved by everyone. I will forever miss our girly days out and talking to you about everything.”

She said her mother had taught her to believe in herself and to do her best. “I will make you proud mum, I promise. I love you soooo much, more than anything and always will.”

Lisa’s husband, Anthony Lees, paid tribute to his “beautiful, gorgeous wife”, calling her his soulmate and his best friend. “I love you so much and always will. Life will never be the same again. My heart has been ripped apart, Lisa you really were such an amazing woman, the perfect mum to India and Lauran, and the coolest nanna to Jayden.

“You brought joy and happiness wherever you were and whoever you were with. You achieved so much in your career as a beauty therapist. We are all so proud of what you achieved, Lisa you really were such an amazing woman.”

Elaine Hunter called Lisa, her daughter, an inspiration who had had a great life ahead of her. Instead, she said, Lisa was an “angel in God’s garden”.



She added: “I am so proud of you for what you achieved. Little did I know that when I spent the day with you on Sunday 14 May it would be the last time I got to hold you as your life was cut short before your time, through a cowardly act of murder and worse was I was on holiday in Turkey.

“You were a wonderful daughter, wife and mother and sister. You achieved such a lot in your life, graduating only last year from university. Before that you won an award of excellence in London for your work with children who had complex mental health issues.”

She said her daughter had supported her though her illness in recent years, adding: “Don’t know how we will go on without you but I know you would want us to, my Darling Daughter I love you now and forever.”

Chloe Rutherford, 17, and Liam Curry, 19

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Chloe Rutherford and Liam Curry. Photograph: GMP

The couple were “perfect for each other and were meant to be”, their families said in a joint statement. “They wanted to be together forever and now they are.” The statement read: “On the night our daughter Chloe died and our son Liam died, their wings were ready but our hearts were not … They were beautiful inside and out to ourselves and our families, and they were inseparable.

“Chloe always described herself as ditzy, who Liam adored and would do anything for, including dealing with Chloe’s demands for chocolate. They lived to go to new places together and explore different cities.”

Sorrell Leczkowski, 14

Sorrell Leczkowski

The 14-year-old was described as “a delightful member of the school community” by her headteacher, Elaine Silson. Leczkowski, who was from Leeds, “enjoyed her studies, had a lovely group of friends and was a real asset to Allerton high school”, Silson said.

“Our whole school community is extremely shocked and saddened by this and our thoughts are with Sorrell’s family and friends at this very difficult time.”

The teenager died after the concert on Monday night. Her mother and grandmother are reported to have been seriously injured.

Michelle Kiss, 45

Kiss had gone to the concert with her daughter Millie, a fan of Ariana Grande who recently starred in Annie the Musical in Liverpool.

Hours before the concert Kiss tweeted a picture of her daughter and another little girl. It read: “Excited girlies ready to watch Ariana.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Michelle Kiss

Her family released a statement in which they said: “Michelle was a loving wife to Tony, mother to Dylan, Elliot and Millie, as well as daughter to Mick and Christine and sister to Nichola.

“Family was her life and we are all obviously devastated by her loss. She has been taken away from us, and all that love her, in the most traumatic way imaginable.



“We hope to draw from the courage and strength she showed in her life to get through this extremely difficult time.”

Olivia Campbell, 15

Olivia Campbell

Olivia’s mother, Charlotte Campbell, announced on Facebook in the early hours of Wednesday that her “darling precious gorgeous girl” had died. “Go sing with the angels and keep smiling mummy loves you so much,” she added.

Olivia attended Tottington high school in Bury. As with many lost in the aftermath of the blast, there had been a huge social media campaign to find her. Her mother told BBC Radio 4 on Tuesday of her desperate attempts to make contact with her daughter. “I’m at home phoning everybody: hospitals, police, the centres that the children have been put in. Her dad’s in Manchester looking for her. I’ve got friends looking for her. I’ve got people I don’t even know looking for her, people messaging me, saying we’ve got her photo, looking for her, we’ll get in contact if we see her. And I’m just hearing nothing. Her phone’s dead.

“They’ve basically told me to stay put and wait for a phone call. I daren’t leave the house just in case she somehow gets home.”

Olivia had been with her friend, Adam Lawler, who was found in hospital.

Martyn Hett, 29

Martyn Hett

Friends of Hett, from Stockport, paid tribute to “our wonderful, iconic and beautiful Martyn” who was always an “upbeat and positive soul”.

His brother, Dan, said on Tuesday that he still had no news of Martyn, who had been due to travel to America for a two-month holiday on Wednesday. But he tweeted on Wednesday: “They found my brother last night. We are heartbroken.”

Russell Hayward, believed to be Hett’s partner, said in a statement: “We got the news last night that our wonderful, iconic and beautiful Martyn didn’t survive. He left this world exactly how he lived, centre of attention. I’m in a really bad way so please forgive if I don’t reply. Thankfully I have his wonderful family and amazing friends to keep each other strong. I love you Martyn. I always will. X.”

Another friend, Christina, also paid tribute to “my best friend, my maid of honour”.

Christina (@ChristinaP89) Thanks for everyone's help and support. I will love him forever. pic.twitter.com/GVYHuLPpxi

Those who knew him well described his love of American divas, 1980s fashion and the Eurovision song contest. He was also an avid Coronation Street fan, and had a distinctive tattoo of Deirdre Barlow on his leg. After learning of his death his partner tweeted: “Soulmate doesn’t even come close. Come back to us Martyn so we can watch last night’s Corrie together.”

On Thursday, the singer Mariah Carey paid tribute to Hett, posting a photograph of him on Instagram. “RIP Martyn Hett. We will cherish your memory forever,” she wrote. “His family and all the families affected are in my thoughts and prayers. MC.”



Hett had appeared on – and won – an episode of the show Come Dine With Me and had delighted in sharing his antics on social media, friends said.



Paul Evans, the managing director of Rumpus PR, where Martyn worked, said: “We are all distraught at the tragic loss of our much-loved, larger than life, colourful and charismatic colleague, Martyn Hett. Martyn was an upbeat and positive soul who saw the good, the joy, the fun in everything.

“Martyn loved life and I hope his lasting legacy is that people – in these dreadful times – choose to live their lives with joy, not hate, just like he did.”

Last year, Hett wrote a moving Twitter Moments story entitled: “How Twitter fell in love with my mother.” He wrote that his mother had sent him a message telling him that she had not sold a single item she had knitted at a craft fair.

Hett put the word out on Twitter and soon her store on the online marketplace Depop was inundated with orders. He posted a message from his mother in which she said she had just taken nine orders, adding: “Thank you my darling, you have made your mother very happy.”

Kelly Brewster, 32



Kelly Brewster

Kelly Brewster was killed in the explosion while shielding her niece from the blast, her family said.

She had attended the Ariana Grande concert with her sister Claire and niece, Hollie Booth. They were both injured in the attack and were being treated in hospital.

Kelly’s boyfriend, Ian Winslow, said on Facebook: “Not sure how this works but it isn’t good news. Kelly Brewster wasn’t one of the unidentified hospital patients. She has sadly passed away in the terror attack yesterday. Kelly really was the happiest she has ever been and we had so many things planned together. My daughter Phoebe will be absolutely devastated like we all are.”

Brewster had put down a deposit on a house with Winslow the day before the attack.

Ian’s father, John, said: “Kelly was a lovely lass. When I think of her now, all I remember is her smile. She used to come round to our house all the time, for Christmas and everything.

“Ian’s seven-year-old daughter absolutely idolised her. Kelly really took her under her wing; she was like a big sister. They went for holidays in London together. They were both looking forward to a bright future and sharing their lives together.”

Her uncle, Paul Dryhurst, previously described how she had been caught up in the blast: “Kelly has shielded Hollie and Claire from the damage. The three were walking out in single file, with Claire in front, Hollie behind her, and Kelly behind her,” he said.

“When the bomb has gone off the impact has broken Claire’s jaw and broken Hollie’s legs. They are both in hospital having nuts and bolts removed from all places.”

Saffie Rose Roussos, eight

Saffie Rose Roussos

Teachers and schoolfriends of Saffie Rose Roussos, the youngest person who died in the attack, held an assembly in her memory on Wednesday. Children wept as they sang Don’t Stop Believing after holding a minute’s silence. Saffie, who lived near Preston, was a pupil at Tarleton community primary school. She was with her mother, Lisa, and sister Ashlee Bromwich to watch the concert.

The headteacher, Chris Upton, said the whole school community had come together on Wednesday in her memory. “As you can imagine, there were tears from the children and staff but we know together we have to hold on to the love among us. We owe that to Saffie and her family. We are a tight-knit school and wider community and will give each other the support that we need at this difficult time,” he said.

Staff and pupils were being supported by specialists from Lancashire county council. Upton said Saffie came from a close, loving family. “We cannot imagine what they are going through. It is hard for adults, let alone young children, to grasp the unfairness and utter randomness of this terrible act,” he said. “Our job now is to support the children and families to deal with the after-effects of this traumatic experience.”

Georgina Callander, 18

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Georgina Callander with Ariana Grande on the gofundme page set up for her



Callander, who was studying health and social care at Runshaw College in Leyland, Lancashire, tweeted Grande on Sunday, saying: “SO EXCITED TO SEE YOU TOMORROW.”

She had previously posted a photograph of herself on Instagram with the singer taken in 2015.

Friends paid tribute to Callander on social media. One wrote: “Rest in peace one of the most kind and beautiful people I’ve ever had the pleasure of calling a friend.” Others described Georgina as a “ray of sunshine”. Another tweeted: “A beautiful girl with the kindest heart & soul, I’ll miss you forever, may you rest in a better place than here. I love you.”

Runshaw College said: “It is with enormous sadness that it appears that one of the people who lost their lives in Monday’s Manchester attack was one of our students … Our deepest sympathies, thoughts and prayers go out to all of Georgina’s friends, family and all of those affected by this loss.”



The college said it was offering counselling to people who had known the teenager well.

John Atkinson, 28



Friends of Atkinson, from Radcliffe, said he had died in the attack, according to the Manchester Evening News. A fundraising page set up to help his family had raised more than £4,000.

“Please donate generously as we all know funeral costs are expensive and will help the family at this sad time! John was one in a million and loved by so many!! A true gentleman. RIP John. Thoughts and prayers with your family and all of the other victims affected by this tragedy,” a message on the page read.

Nana Julie Mills said on Facebook: “Just heard one of my good friends whom I’ve known since he was a little boy passed away last night. Condolences to his family and friends. RIP John Atkinson.”

John Atkinson

Alison Howe, 45

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Alison Howe

Howe, from Royton, Greater Manchester, had gone to the arena with her friend Lisa Lees to pick up their daughters from the concert. They had been reported missing on Tuesday by their families but on Wednesday morning they were confirmed as having been killed in the blast.

A relative wrote on Facebook late on Tuesday: “They took a caring beautiful mum and stepmother away from us all she was amazing to us all x love you loads Alison Howexx.”

Angelika Klis, 40, and Marcin Klis, 42

Angelika and Marcin lived and worked in York. On Tuesday the couple’s daughter shared an appeal to find her parents, who had not been seen since the attack. The student shared a photograph on Facebook of the pair taken before the concert, writing: “Anyone who is in any safe place or hospital in Manchester, if anyone comes across my parents please please let me know as they’ve been missing ever since the attack.

“This is a picture taken tonight so this is exactly what they were wearing.”

Poland’s foreign minister, Witold Waszczykowski, said a couple who had been waiting for their daughters at the arena had been killed. The Polish embassy in London confirmed they were Angelika and Marcin Klis.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Angelika and Marcin Klis

Nell Jones, 14



Facebook Twitter Pinterest Nell Jones

The headteacher of Holmes Chapel comprehensive has confirmed that 14-year-old Nell Jones was a victim of Monday’s attack in Manchester.

Nell had been missing since the blast and a friend had tweeted a picture of her. She had been on crutches but it is understood she had left them in the car to go and see Ariana Grande perform in the Manchester Arena.



The headteacher, Denis Oliver, told Express.co.uk: “It has now been announced in the school that Nell has unfortunately died. I have just done six assemblies to tell the pupils. Children are all over the place crying. We are all devastated. The heart wrenches for me and everyone else.”

Jane Tweddle-Taylor, 51

Jane Tweddle-Taylor

“Welcoming, funny and generous” school receptionist Jane Tweddle-Taylor, 51, was also named as one of the 22 people killed in the attack. Her partner, Mark Taylor – who was away on business in London on Monday evening – described the mother of three daughters as “a very lovely lady, liked by everybody”.



“She was full of life, very energetic with the children and going to functions and all sorts of different things – skiing and all those happy times and activities,” he told the BBC.

Taylor said Jane and her friend were waiting for her friend’s daughter when the blast struck. “She had gone back to pick them up as arranged and they were both waiting in the area where the explosion happened,” he said. “Unfortunately, Jane didn’t come back.”

Taylor said he had been contacted by Tweddle-Taylor’s daughter and the family began contacting hospitals before being informed that she had been killed.

He paid tribute to the emergency services and the “unbelievably organised” counselling that was made available at Manchester City’s Etihad Stadium.

“One of the biggest challenges we’ve had is one of my daughters was away travelling in Australia, so we were trying to pick a time to notify her,” he said. “Some of the counsellors arranged flights for her and her friend to come back, without a second thought.”

Colleagues at South Shore academy in Blackpool, where Tweddle-Taylor worked, paid tribute to their “bubbly and kind” colleague.

The principal, Jane Bailey, said: “We are devastated at this sad news. Jane was a well-loved member of staff and our thoughts are with her friends and family at this terrible time.

“Jane was a truly wonderful friend and colleague to all of us at South Shore academy. As our receptionist, she was in many ways the public face of the school and she represented us amazingly in this role.”

The school had been inundated with messages of condolences, all saying “our lovely Jane” was “bubbly, kind, welcoming, funny, generous”, said Bailey.

“Our thoughts are also with her family at this dreadful time and in particular her three daughters. In our school family and theirs, she is irreplaceable, much loved and will never be forgotten.”

Wendy Fawell, 50



Wendy Fawell

Staff at a primary school have expressed their “deep sadness” after confirming the death of their former colleague Wendy Fawell in the Manchester bombing.

On Thursday St Oswald’s C of E primary school, in Guiseley, said on Twitter: “It is with deepest sadness that I confirm that our former colleague Wendy Fawell was killed in the Manchester bombing. RIP, Wendy.”

More than 100 people attended a vigil for Wendy in Otley, West Yorkshire, on Tuesday evening.

The 50-year-old, from Otley, was believed to have been at the concert with her 15-year-old daughter. When she couldn’t be found after the blast her family began a desperate search.

While the search continued her son Adam Fawell, 29, told the Yorkshire Evening Post: “The support we are getting from friends and family is unbelievable and the stuff that is going around generally is incredible and a little bit overwhelming.”

Elaine McIver, 43

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Elaine McIver

The family of Elaine McIver confirmed on Thursday that she had been killed in the blast on Monday. The “much loved” Cheshire police officer was at the Ariana Grande concert with her husband, Paul, and two children. Paul remains critically ill in hospital.

In a statement, her family said Elaine was “a much-loved daughter, sister, auntie, friend and colleague, the best we could ever have wished for”.

“She was everyone’s friend, thoughtful beyond belief with an effervescent and outgoing personality.

“She would have been devastated by the injuries sustained by her partner, Paul, and we all wish him a speedy recovery.

“Elaine just loved life, and had a major love of music. Despite what has happened to her, she would want us all to carry on regardless and not be frightened by fear tactics; instead she regularly urged us all to rise up against it.

“Although we will all miss her beyond belief, we absolutely know she will live in our hearts forever.”

Courtney Boyle, 19

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Courtney Boyle

Boyle’s family confirmed she had been killed with her stepfather, Philip Tron, in Monday’s terrorist attack. Her sister called her a “wonder of a sister who is now a shining yellow star in the sky”.

Her mother, Deborah, said her “stunning, beautiful daughter” was her rock. “You made me so proud with all you had achieved.”

In a statement Boyle’s father said he would miss his “baby girl” for the rest of his life: “I will never forget you and I will love you forever. Grandad Bob misses you loads also. Daddy.”

Her boyfriend said she was “an adventurer, a precious and joyous soul”.

He said: “She made people feel loved and feel safe. She was a soulmate, a friend, a daughter and a sister. No one had what that lass had, she was like no other. And she was on a path to fulfilment, and was happy when she passed. Nobody has ever made me as happy as her and I’m the person I am today because of her.”

Philip Tron, 32

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Philip Tron

Philip’s partner, Deborah, said he had made her happy. “My gorgeous crazy Philip you made my world a happy place and now you are both my angels flying high in the sky,” she said.

Her daughter, Philip’s stepdaughter, said: “Phil, my stepdad, my costa buddy, you were always there no matter what to keep me safe and make me happy.”

Philip’s mother thanked the emergency services, police, nurses, support staff family and friends for their support during such a “harrowing time”.

“Our most amazing son, partner, brother, father, uncle, nephew and cousin, Philip Tron, sadly passed away on 22 May 2017. Philip was such a fun-loving, energetic soul, he would light up the darkest room and lift your spirits with his infectious laugh, witty sense of humour and his beautiful smile. Words cannot express the huge void his passing has left in all our lives.”

Megan Hurley, 15



Friends of Megan’s family, from Halewood, near Liverpool, said she had died in the attack. Her parents, who run a shop in the area, are understood to be in hospital with her brother as he recovers from his injuries.

A fundraising page in memory of Megan has raised more than £6,000. Helen McDermott, who set up the page, told the Guardian: “We just wanted to do something for the family. We originally set a target of £500 and are overwhelmed by the support. The police have contacted the family to let them know about the page and one of her relatives made contact with me.

“The whole community has sent messages of support.”