Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Celine Dion had been due to play two summer shows at the venue

Manchester Arena is to stay shut until September following the terror attack that killed 22 people last month.

Concerts by acts including Celine Dion, Radiohead, Bros and Blink-182 have been cancelled or rearranged.

A statement from the arena said it was "always our intention to honour our existing summer events".

But it added: "The damage caused to the main public area outside of the arena has left us with no other option than to remain closed until September."

The venue's operators are "working towards" a re-opening in early September - which will be more than three months after the bombing at the end of an Ariana Grande concert.

Image copyright PA Image caption Radiohead will now play one stadium show instead of the two arena dates

The next event in the arena's schedule is a concert by US singer John Legend on 16 September.

Radiohead were due to play two dates at the venue on 4 and 5 July - but will now play a single night at Old Trafford cricket ground on 4 July instead.

Fans with tickets to the band's arena shows can either swap them for the new stadium gig or get a full refund.

Extra tickets for the Old Trafford show will go on sale on Saturday. A statement from the promoter said: "The group apologise to fans for any inconvenience."

The latest arena announcements:

Ritchie Blackmore's Rainbow on 22 June - cancelled

on 22 June - cancelled Celine Dion on 25 June & 1 August - postponed, with no new dates yet announced

on 25 June & 1 August - postponed, with no new dates yet announced Radiohead on 4 & 5 July - moved to Emirates Old Trafford

on 4 & 5 July - moved to Emirates Old Trafford Linkin Park on 7 July - no further information yet

on 7 July - no further information yet Blink-182 on 14 July - cancelled

on 14 July - cancelled Key103 Live on 15 July - cancelled

on 15 July - cancelled Paw Patrol Live! on 19 & 20 August - promoters are seeking an alternative venue

on 19 & 20 August - promoters are seeking an alternative venue Bros on 22 August - cancelled

The arena's statement said it was working with promoters of the summer concerts "to find suitable solutions for events affected by this unprecedented closure".

It continued: "We would like to offer our heartfelt gratitude to all our customers and friends for their continued support and patience during this time and our ongoing thoughts and prayers remain with all those affected by the 22 May atrocity."

Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.