Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

The number of people injured in the Manchester Arena bombing has risen to 250 - according to police - with many suffering from the psychological trauma of the attack.

At a press conference today Chief Constable Ian Hopkins said many people present during the Manchester Arena bombing have suffered both physical and mental health problems.

A total of 22 peole were killed as they left the Ariane Grande concert. And the senior policeman gave an updated figure on those injured as he spoke at the launch of a new review about how to prevent a future attack by combating extremism.

“Over 250 people were injured that night,” he said. “That number has increased with more people coming forward with psychological injuries as well and physical.”

Stressing his ‘immense pride’ in his officers Mr Hopkins said it was vital to learn lessons from GMP’s response and ‘redouble’ efforts while the national threat level remains severe.

(Image: Getty Images Europe)

He said ‘mental ill health’ and ‘religious illiteracy’ are both factors which lead to radicalisation and stressed the need for a new approach to tackling exremeism.

Counter terror police are still working to understand how terrorist Salman Abedi was radicalised and what his movements were leading up to the May 22 attack.

Officers are still searching a waste disposal plant in Bury for a blue suitcase which was carried around the city by Abedi in the days before the atrocity.

Terrorism specialists are using ‘diplomatic channels’ in the hope of speaking directly to Abedi’s brother Hashem - who is currently being held by Libyan security forces.

The chief constable was speaking as Greater Manchester Mayor Andy Burnham announced details of an Independent Review into the region’s preparedness and response to the terror attack.

The review, led by Deputy Mayor for Policing and Crime Beverley Hughes, will look first hand accounts from members of the emergency services.

However it will also give prominence to the experiences of those caught up in the attack.

“We want to listen to the survivors and those who lost family members,” Mrs Hughes said.

She said authorities must ‘learn lessons’ from their approach to the attack in order to further safeguard our communities in future.

Mr Burnham said the review would also explore whether information can be shared by security services to communities can keep a ‘watching brief’.

The review into the emergency services response will begin in September with an interim report expected by the end of the year.

Tackling extremism has got to begin with families and communities

(Image: Manchester Evening News)

Women and young people will play a vital role in tackling violent extremism in Greater Manchester, said the region’s mayor.

A new commission will be set up to examine the root causes of violence in the wake of the Manchester Arena attack - will draw on voices from all of the region’s communities.

And Andy Burnham said women and young people will have a key part in flagging up early warning signs and leading ‘open, honest and difficult discussions’.

The commission - which will work with schools, religious organisations, and youth groups - will also work to produce clearer guidelines to help people challenge behaviour and better understand the signs of extremism.

It comes as Home Secretary Amber Rudd announced a national review of how the authorities dealt with the recent terror attacks. The UK-wide review will be led by senior anti-terror expert David Anderson and look at what lessons can be learned from this year’s attacks in Westminster, Mancheste, London Bridge and Finsbury Park.

Meanwhile in Greater Manchester, local leaders said they were determined to tackle the root cause of why people turned to violent extremism.

Speaking at the launch of the region’s own independent review into terrorism, Mr Burnham said: “We need to begin a difficult conversation about what more we can do to tackle rising extremism which, sadly, has become a feature of the times we are living in.

“That extremism is to be found in all communities.

“One of the most difficult aspects of this attack was the fact that the perpetrator grew up here. In my view tackling extremism has got to begin with families and communities.

“We all need to ask what more we can do to identify those who pose a risk to others.”

Mr Burnham said the Government’s Prevent scheme - a key part of the government’s counter-terrorism strategy - has ‘lost community buy in’.

But he insisted that the work of the commission would not undermine Prevent scheme but rather create an approach ‘very specific’ to Greater Manchester.

“This is not about undermining Prevent, it’s about improving and rebranding it. Devolution can play a big part in this. Let’s come up with a plan that works for us here.”

He added: “We want to have those open and honest difficult discussions.

“It starts with families. It’s about engaging them in the right way, a supportive way rather than feeling that if you say something there is a cloud of suspicion cast over you.”

Coun Rishi Shori, portfolio lead for young people and social cohesion, will lead the commission’s report into extremism alongside Oldham Council leader Jean Stretton.

A report is expected to be published in early 2018.

Coun Shori said grassroots involvement must be restored to tackle and confront violent extremism in all it’s forms.

He said communities have asked for more support and help in identifying and tackling radicalisation and in some respects Prevent has ‘alienated’ some people.

Protecting people from extremism cannot be left to the state alone, he said. It must involve families and communities ‘best placed to identify potential signs’.

“Radicalisation needs to be tackled using a grassroots approach,” he said.