Emergency services at Manchester Arena after reports of an explosion at the venue during an Ariana Grande gig (Picture: PA)

Twelve children under the age of 16 were among the 59 casualties taken to hospital after the terror attack at Manchester Arena.

The disturbing figure was confirmed by David Ratcliffe, medical director of North West Ambulance Service has said.

At least 22 were killed in the bombing which targeted young music fans as they left an Ariana Grande concert at in Manchester.

Isis claim responsibility for the Manchester attack that killed 22

‘There are a number of individuals who have very, very serious injuries and are requiring intensive care and people who are going to be in hospital for a long time in terms of that treatment,’ Jon Rouse, Chief Officer of the Greater Manchester Health and Social Care Partnership said.

’12 children went to Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital.

‘The other hospital received mostly adults and then there were walking wounded which will have gone to different centres, some of which would have been children,’ North West Ambulance Service Medical Director David Ratcliffe said.

Saffie Rose Roussos was killed in the attack (Picture: PA)

Saffie Rose Roussos, an eight-year-old girl from Leyland is confirmed among those killed in the Manchester bomb attack, Lancashire County Council has said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

In a statement released this afternoon, Tarleton Community Primary School headteacher, Chris Upton, said the news was ‘heartbreaking’.

Fundraiser set up for victims of Manchester attack exceeds £65,000

‘News of Saffie’s death in this appalling attack has come as a tremendous shock to all of us and I would like to send our deepest condolences to all of her family and friends,’ said Mr Upton.

‘The thought that anyone could go out to a concert and not come home is heartbreaking.’

Earlier today Georgina Callander was named as the first victim to be named.

Georgina Callender with Ariana Grande

The teenager, 18, tweeted on Sunday that she was ‘so excited’ to see Ariana Grande, with whom she had been pictured two years ago.

Here's what we know about the Manchester attack so far: The attack was carried out by 22-year-old Salman Abedi.

Abedi was a lone male suicide bomber who detonated an improvised explosive device.

22 people have been killed and 59 were taken to hospital following the blast. 119 people were injured in total.

Children are among the dead

The youngest named victim was eight years old

The lone attacker died at the arena

Police are investigating whether he acted alone or was part of a network

It is the worst terrorist attack in the UK since 56 people were killed in the 7/7 London bombings in 2005.

The explosion rocked the Manchester Arena at the conclusion of a performance by the American star Ariana Grande.

Manchester Arena said the explosion happened outside the venue, as people began streaming from the doors.

Greater Manchester Police said they were called to the venue at around 10.33pm and approach roads were closed.

The blast is being treated as a terrorist incident.

More than 400 officers were deployed on the operation throughout Monday night.

Manchester Victoria station was evacuated and trains cancelled.

The victims are being treated at eight hospitals across Greater Manchester, Chief Constable Ian Hopkins said.

The Prime Minister condemned what was being treated as an 'appalling terrorist attack' and said she would chair a meeting of the Government's emergency Cobra committee on Tuesday.

All national General Election campaigning was suspended after the explosion.

A controlled explosion was carried out by police at the Cathedral Gardens area near Manchester Arena shortly after 1.30am.

Police said the suspicious item at the centre of the controlled explosion was just abandoned clothing.

The first victim of the Manchester terror attack has been named as Georgina Callendar

Two more victims have since been named - 26-year-old John Atkinson, and eight-year-old Saffie Rose Roussos.

Police have arrested a man, 23, in connection with the terror attack at Manchester Arena.

Vigils were held in cities all over the country the next day, May 23

Theresa May has raised the UK's terror threat level from 'severe' to 'critical' - the highest level. Britain's Prime Minister Theresa May speaks outside 10 Downing Street (Picture: Reuters) Theresa May has made a statement in Downing Street following the Manchester attack. She said: 'Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and the families and friends of all those affected. 'It is now beyond doubt that the people of Manchester and of this country have fallen victim to a callous terrorist attack, an attack that targeted some of the youngest people in our society with cold calculation. 'This was among the worst terrorist incidents we have ever experienced in the United Kingdom.' See our Manchester attack coverage here.