ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

Manchester mayor Andy Burnham has said the spirit of the city will prevail after 22 people were killed in an "evil" terror attack.

The former Labour MP admitted the city is "grieving" today over the horrifying attack on teenage fans at an Ariana Grande concert in the Manchester Arena.

A suicide bomber is believed to have arrived by train and then struck the departing crowd at 10.30pm. The attacker died at the scene.

Speaking on Tuesday morning, Mr Burnham said: "It is hard to believe what has happened here in the last few hours, and to put into words the shock, anger, and hurt that we feel today.

"These were children, young people and their families that those responsible chose to terrorise and kill. This was an evil act."

He offered his support to the families of the victims, and paid tribute to locals who had opened their doors to strangers and offered shelter to those fleeing the Manchester Arena and evacuated areas.

The mayor said this was the "best possible message to those who seek to divide us", and would be the prevailing spirit of Manchester.

He said: "We are grieving today, but we are strong. Today it will be business as usual, as far as possible in our great city."

Manchester Arena explosion aftermath - In pictures 35 show all Manchester Arena explosion aftermath - In pictures 1/35 Stephanie Brodie and mother Lisa Brodie who were inside the foyer when the explosion happened Jeremy Selwyn 2/35 Armed police patrol near Victoria station in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 3/35 Police close to the Manchester Arena the morning after a terrorist attack at the end of a concert by Ariana Grande left 22 dead PA 4/35 Prime Minister Theresa May addresses the media in Downing Street Stefan Rousseau/PA 5/35 A police officer moves a floral tribute close to the Manchester Arena PA 6/35 A man embraces a woman and a teenager as he collects them from the Park Inn Hotel where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at the Manchester Arena Getty Images 7/35 Police forensic officers investigate the scene of an explosion at Victoria Station Getty Images 8/35 People affected by the deadly terror attack at Manchester Arena look out from a hotel window in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 9/35 Police stand guard at the scene of a suspected terrorist attack during a pop concert by Ariana Grande in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 10/35 A flag flies at half-mast from the Houses of Parliament AFP/Getty Images 11/35 Mayor of Greater Manchester Andy Burnham and Manchester City Council Leader Sir Richard Leese speak to the media outside Manchester Town Hall after a suicide bomber killed 22 people, including children, as an explosion tore through fans leaving a pop concert in Manchester. PA 12/35 Police forensic investigators walk along a bridge linking Victoria Station with the Manchester Arena where a suspected terrorist attack at the end of a concert Ariana Grande PA 13/35 Tributes left outside St Ann's Church in Manchester Ben Birchall/PA 14/35 The scene at Manchester Royal Infirmary as the death toll from the Manchester bomb attack rose to 22 with 59 injured PA 15/35 Armed police patrol inside Victoria Station adjacent to Manchester Arena Getty Images 16/35 A flag flies at half-mast from the Treasury Office in London AFP/Getty Images 17/35 Tributes left outside St Ann's Church in Manchester PA 18/35 Greater Manchester Police chief constable Ian Hopkins speaks to the media in Manchester where he said that the death toll from the Manchester bomb attack has risen to 22 with 59 injured PA 19/35 Susan Walton and her daughter Katie who attended the pop concert by US star Ariana Grande pose in Mancheste AFP/Getty Images 20/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 21/35 A police officer escorts people near to Manchester Arena Getty Images 22/35 Police stand guard at the scene of a suspected terrorist attack during a pop concert by Ariana Grande in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 23/35 Tributes left outside St Ann's Church in Manchester PA 24/35 A man embraces a woman and a teenager as he collects them from the Park Inn Hotel where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at the Manchester Arena Getty Images 25/35 People leave Victoria Station adjacent to Manchester Arena Getty Images 26/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Karen Moore and her daughter Molly Steed, aged 14, from Derby, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 27/35 U.S. President Donald Trump speaks about the attack in Manchester Reuters 28/35 A Union Flag flies above Victoria Railway Station, close to the Manchester Arena Getty Images 29/35 An ambulance arrives as police officers stand at the Miller Street and Corporation Street Crossroads, near the Manchester Arena Getty Images 30/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Vikki Baker and her daughter Charlotte, aged 13, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 31/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Vikki Baker and her daughter Charlotte, aged 13, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 32/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Vikki Baker and her daughter Charlotte, aged 13, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 33/35 Home Secretary Amber Rudd arrives for a COBRA meeting in Downing Street Getty Images 34/35 British Defence Secretary Michael Fallon arrives for COBRA meeting at the Cabinet Office on Whitehall Getty Images 35/35 Flags fly at half mast above Downing Street, London, after a suicide bomber killed 22 people, including children, as an explosion tore through fans leaving a pop concert in Manchester PA

The former health secretary thanked the hundreds of emergency services personnel who worked through the night in the most "difficult circumstances imaginable", and those who had offered their support from other cities and countries.

The attacker struck at 10.30pm as hordes of concert-goers streamed out of the arena.

The wounded were showered with glass and metal nuts after a "huge bomb-like bang" went off at as people waited to leave the arena after the show finished.

The death toll stood at 22 on Tuesday morning, while more than 50 people were also taken to hospitals around Manchester.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said his thoughts were with those caught up in the "terrible incident".

Lucy Powell, Manchester Central's Labour candidate and the MP before the election, said the city would "come together and unite in solidarity".

Election campaigning will be paused, with Theresa May saying police were treating the incident as an "appalling terrorist attack".

Tim Farron, who cancelled a planned campaign visit to Gibraltar, said: "This is a shocking and horrific attack targeting children and young people who were simply enjoying a concert.

"My deepest sympathies are with the victims, and with families who have lost loved ones, as well as those desperately waiting for news.

"I would like to pay tribute to the bravery and dedication of the emergency services.

"This is an attack on innocent people and the nation is united both in its grief and its determination to stand up to this deplorable attack."