Salman Abedi once accused a teacher of Islamophobia after being challenged on what he thought of suicide bombings, it has emerged.

As a teenager at the Burnage Academy for Boys, he was among an Arabic-speaking group of friends who launched a complaint after the teacher “asked what they thought of someone who would strap on a bomb and blow people up”, The Times reported.

“A group went to complain to their RE teacher saying it was Islamophobic,” a source said.

Former acquaintances of the Manchester attacker have remembered him as a cannabis-smoking, drinking, sometimes angry teenager who underwent an abrupt transformation within recent years.

After his family moved back to Libya during the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi, he made frequent visits to the war-torn country but stayed living in Manchester with his brother.

As signs of Abedi’s radicalisation grew, seeing him appear increasingly pious while flying a black Islamist flag from his home, the alarm was repeatedly raised.

Around five years ago, two people who know the 22-year-old at college called the police anti-terror hotline after he told them “being a suicide bomber was okay”.

Two community leaders also reported Abedi over his extremist views in 2015, fearing he was already involved in terror networks.

He was banned from Didsbury Mosque and reported again to authorities after criticising an imam who delivered a sermon condemning Isis.

One of Abedi’s said he had felt increasing frustration at his treatment in the UK, which was heightened after a friend was stabbed to death in what he perceived to be a religious hate crime.

She added that the British-born bomber began referring to others in the country as “infidels” who were “unjust to Arabs”.

Abedi’s family had reportedly warned authorities he was “dangerous”, moving him and his younger brother to Libya in April to keep a closer eye, months after Abedi dropped out of his business degree at Salford University.

But he returned to Manchester, flying via Istanbul and Düsseldorf on 18 May but apparently failing to flag up on any international databases or warning systems.

Four days later, he detonated a suicide bomb in the foyer of Manchester Arena as thousands of young Ariana Grande fans streamed out of a concert, killing seven people.

Manchester explosion in pictures







37 show all Manchester explosion in pictures







































































1/37 People running down stairs as they attempt to exit the Manchester Arena after a blast, where U.S. singer Ariana Grande had been performing, in Manchester Twitter/@ZACH_BRUCE/ via REUTERS

2/37 Helpers attend to people inside the Manchester Arena after a suspected suicide bomber detonated an explosive device at the end of an Ariana Grande concert, killing 22 people PA wire

3/37 Armed officers guard outside a hotel near the Manchester Arena following reports of an explosion, in Manchester, Britain EPA

4/37 Police officers are seen outside the Manchester Arena, where U.S. singer Ariana Grande had been performing, in Manchester, northern England Reuters

5/37 Getty Images

6/37 Getty Images

7/37 Getty Images

8/37 AFP/Getty Images

9/37 Police and fans close to the Manchester Arena, after reports of an explosion Getty Images

10/37 There have been reports of explosions at Manchester Arena where Ariana Grande had performed Getty Images

11/37 Police deploy at scene of explosion in Manchester, England, at a concert in Manchester Arena AFP/Getty Images

12/37 Police stand by a cordoned off street close to the Manchester Arena Getty Images

13/37 Police deploy at scene of explosion in Manchester, England AFP/Getty Images

14/37 Police deploy at scene of a reported explosion during a concert in Manchester, England, on May 23, 2017. British police said early May 23 there were "a number of confirmed fatalities" after reports of at least one explosion during a pop concert by US singer Ariana Grande. Ambulances were seen rushing to the Manchester Arena venue and police added in a statement that people should avoid the area AFP/Getty Images

15/37 An ambulance drives away from the Manchester Arena, where U.S. singer Ariana Grande had been performing, in Manchester Reuters

16/37 Police escort members of the public from the Manchester Arena in Manchester, England. Getty Images

17/37 A woman sits in the street in a blanket near the Manchester Arena as police guard the area following reports of an explosion, in Manchester, Britain EPA

18/37 Two women wrapped in thermal blankets stand near the Manchester Arena, where US singer Ariana Grande had been performing, in Manchester Reuters

19/37 A Royal Logistic Corps (RLC) bomb disposal robot is unloaded outside the Manchester Arena following reports of an explosion, in Manchester. At least 19 people have been confirmed dead and others 50 were injured, authorities said. It is being treated as a terrorist incident until police know otherwise EPA

20/37 A Royal Logistic Corps (RLC) bomb disposal robot is unloaded outside the Manchester Arena following reports of an explosion, in Manchester EPA

21/37 Members of the public receive treatment from emergency service staff at Victoria Railway Station close to the Manchester Arena on May 23, 2017 in Manchester, England. There have been reports of explosions at Manchester Arena where Ariana Grande had performed this evening. Greater Manchester Police have have confirmed there are fatalities and warned people to stay away from the area Getty Images

22/37 Armed police after a suspected terrorist attack at the Manchester Arena at the end of a concert by US star Ariana Grande left 19 dead PA wire

23/37 Emergency services arrive close to the Manchester Arena in Manchester Getty Images

24/37 An amoured police vehicle patrols near Manchester Arena in Manchester Getty Images

25/37 A man carries a young girl on his shoulders near Victoria station in Manchester AFP/Getty Images

26/37 Police officers stand at the Miller Street and Corporation Street Crossroads, in front of the Manchester Arena in Manchester, England Getty Images

27/37 Police block a road near to the Manchester Arena in central Manchester, England AP

28/37 Armed police patrol near Victoria station in Manchester, northwest England. Twenty two people have been killed and dozens injured after a suspected suicide bomber targeted fans leaving a concert of US singer Ariana Grande in Manchester Getty Images

29/37 Police forensic officers leave the Manchester Arena as they investigate the scene of an explosion in Manchester Getty Images

30/37 A forensic officer collects evidence on a walkway between Victoria station and Manchester Arena following a deadly terror attack in Manchester, Getty Images

31/37 A woman and a young girl wearing a t-shirt of US singer Ariana Grande talks to police near Manchester Arena following a deadly terror attack in Manchester, Getty

32/37 EPA

33/37 Mayor of Greater Manchester Andy Burnham and Manchester City Council Leader Sir Richard Leese speak to the media outside Manchester Town Hall after a suicide bomber killed 22 people, including children, as an explosion tore through fans leaving a pop concert in Manchester Dave Higgens/PA Wire

34/37 The media gather behind a police cordon in Manchester Getty Images

35/37 Flowers left close to the Manchester Arena, the morning after a suicide bomber killed 22 people, including children, as an explosion tore through fans leaving a pop concert in Manchester Danny Lawson/PA Wire

36/37 Ariana Grande concert attendees Karen Moore and her daughter Molly Steed, aged 14, from Derby, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty

37/37 Signs saying 'We love Manchester' are displayed in a window in Manchester, England Getty Images

Libyan authorities, who are questioning Abedi's parents and siblings in Tripoli, claimed he made a final phone call to his brother and mother before the attack, in which he said: “Forgive me.”

The Home Secretary, Amber Rudd, has admitted Abedi was “known up to a point” to security services but they will be examining how so many opportunities to stop the terrorist were missed.

He is believed to be part of a far wider network including prolific Isis recruiter Raphael Hostey, also from Manchester, who was killed in a drone strike in Syria last year.

Counter-terror police made a fresh arrest in Moss Side in the early hours of Friday morning, while searches were being carried out at a separate arrest.

Eight men are currently being questioned in relation to the attack, with a man and woman who were previously arrested released without charge.

With the UK on critical alert, meaning another attack is expected imminently, thousands of soldiers have been deployed at sensitive sites to support overstretched police.

British police have resumed “working closely” with US authorities on the probe after a row over intelligence leaked to American media outlets.