French Interior Minister Gerard Collomb talks to journalists on May 20, 2017 | Philippe Desmazes/ AFP via Getty Images French interior minister: Salman Abedi had ‘proven’ links with Islamic State Abedi had gone to Libya, and ‘probably’ to Syria as well, the minister said.

Salman Abedi, the man suspected of carrying out the Manchester suicide bombing, had traveled to Libya and “probably” Syria and had links with Islamic State, French Interior Minister Gérard Collomb said Wednesday.

Speaking to BFMTV, Collomb said: “Today we only know what British investigators have told us — someone of British nationality, of Libyan origin, who suddenly after a trip to Libya, then probably to Syria, becomes radicalized and decides to carry out this attack.”

When asked whether Abedi was part of the larger network, Collomb said: “We don’t know yet, but perhaps yes. In any case, [his] links with ISIS are proven.”

Collomb’s comments, which revealed information British authorities had yet to release, came despite the fact U.K. Home Secretary Amber Rudd on Wednesday reprimanded U.S. officials for leaking classified information about the investigation to the press.

“The British police have been very clear that they want to control flow of information in order to protect operational integrity — the element of surprise — so it is irritating if it is released by other sources, and I have been very clear with our friends that it should not happen again,” Rudd said during an interview with BBC Radio 4.

Collomb appeared on BFMTV to discuss French President Emmanuel Macron’s move to extend France’s state of emergency, imposed in response to the 2015 Paris attacks, until November 1.

The decision to seek parliament approval for the extension followed a defense council gathering top security officials during which the Manchester bombing was discussed, Macron’s office said in a statement.

Macron also ordered his staff to set up by June 7 a special unit devoted to coordinating intelligence operations against terrorism, which was one of his campaign vows.

Nicholas Vinocur contributed.