'The face of hate': Manchester Arena attack suspect Salman Abedi's home raided, disturbing book found

ITN A neighbour captured the moment armed police stormed a house believed to be linked to the Manchester Arena suicide bomber.

British intelligence services are probing the Manchester Arena suicide bombing suspect's links to terror groups such as al-Qaeda and Isis as a Manchester imam says he showed "the face of hate", The Telegraph reports.

The Sun and Guardian newspapers on Wednesday (NZT) published what they said were photos of suspect Salman Abedi as investigators continued to comb his Manchester home for clues.

Police set off a controlled explosion to enter the house in Elsmore Road in Fallowfield, further fraying the nerves of on-edge residents.

One of the first pictures of Manchester suicide bomber, Salman Abedi, taken some years back.

The electoral roll listed Abedi, 22, as living at the address. A neighbour caught the controlled explosion on camera.

An investigator in protective forensic gear was photographed carrying a booklet titled "KNOW YOUR CHEMICALS!" out of the house.

Abedi was born in Manchester in 1994 to parents of Libyan birth, US security officials said, citing British intelligence officials.

DANNY LAWSON/PA IMAGES A police forensic investigator carries out a book titled 'KNOW YOUR CHEMICALS!' out of the address.

READ MORE:

* Live: Bombing suspect identified

* Crowds cheer poet's tribute to Manchester

* 'I woke up shaking' - concertgoer's night of terror

* Manchester residents defiant

* Who is bombing suspect?

Abedi grew up in a Libyan community known for its strong opposition to Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's regime, The Telegraph said.

He had become radicalised "recently" and intelligence agencies said he had made recent trips to Libya, where his parents have been living for some time, The Telegraph reported.

AFP British police name the suspected attacker behind the Manchester concert bombing that killed 22 people as Salman Abedi.

'THE FACE OF HATE'

Abedi's older brother Ismail had been a tutor at Manchester's Didsbury mosque's Koran school.

The imam of the mosque told The Telegraph that Salman Abedi, who wore Islamic dress, had shown him "the face of hate" when he gave a talk warning on the dangers of so-called Islamic State.

GETTY IMAGES Forensics officers at Manchester Arena, where a suicide bomb blast killed at least 22 people.

He was understood to have been a student at Salford University between 2014 and 2016, where he took a business and management course, the Press Association reported.

Abedi had dropped out of his course. He would have been due to graduate in the coming months, a source said.

"All at the University of Salford are shocked and saddened by the events of last night. Our thoughts are with all those involved, their families and their friends," Dr Sam Grogan, the university's pro-vice chancellor for student experience, said, according to The Telegraph.

"We have provided, and continue to provide, support to all students and staff who have been affected."

SECOND ARREST BELIEVED TO BE BROTHER

Abedi's parents emigrated from Libya to London before moving to the Fallowfield area of south Manchester, where they have lived for at least 10 years, the officials said.

A 23-year-old man arrested by police in a separate raid in south Manchester was believed to be Abedi's brother.

CBS reported that Abedi was known to British authorities prior to Monday night's attack, though no official confirmation has so far been forthcoming.

The Guardian reported that police had recovered CCTV footage showing Abedi walking into Manchester Arena before the blast. A source said he was believed to have carried the bomb in a bag.

SECOND YOUNGEST OF FOUR KIDS

Abedi was reportedly the second youngest of four children to mother Samia Tabbal, 50, and father Ramadan Abedi.

The BBC reported he had an elder brother, who was born in London, and a younger brother and sister, Jomana Abedi, who were both born in Manchester.

He said it was possible the brothers had travelled between the two countries since then.

A trustee of the mosque, Fawzi Haffar, said Abedi's father was currently in Libya and had been there for a while.

The Manchester bombing is the worst terror attack in the United Kingdom since the London bombings in 2005 that killed 56 people. It comes just two months after an attack near Parliament in London killed five people.

- Stuff and agencies