ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

The suspect behind the Manchester bomb attack has been identified by the city's police chief.

The alleged bomber has been named as Salman Abedi, 22, by Greater Manchester Chief Constable Ian Hopkins.

A blast just after 10.30pm on Monday shook the Manchester Arena as music fans, many of whom were young children, left an Ariana Grande concert at the 21,000 capacity venue.

Armed officers raided suspected bomber’s address in the city where the attack took place ordering residents indoors as they carried out a controlled explosion.

The Fallowfield property, where Abedi was registered as living, became the centre of the investigation into the atrocity outrage as detectives hunted those thought to be behind the blast.

Greater Manchester Police said a controlled explosion was carried out in Elsmore Road at around lunchtime on Tuesday.

It came as a 23-year-old man was also arrested by plain clothes police officers in south Manchester over the deadly bombing .

As armed officers carried out the swoop, equipped with guns and body armour, those who live there described the "sizeable bang" they heard.

The suspect was named by US security services in Washington, as those who live on the red-bricked semi-detached street said they know little about those who reside at the address.

Simon Turner, 46, who has lived in the neighbourhood all of his life, said he was standing in the street talking to his neighbour at around 12pm when police descended.

He told the Press Association: "It was so quick, these cars just pulled up and all these police with guns, dogs, jumped out of the car and said to us 'get in the house now'."

He said the police surrounded the property in question, that officers "did something" and said "the next thing the door blew off the house".

"It was like something from a movie scene, it was unbelievable really," he added, while also saying there was "loads of noise" when police stormed the property.

Mr Turner said "two young lads" live at the house in question, but that he knows very little about them, and said nothing like the incident has ever happened before.

He said he has not seen anyone arrested, but that officers in white forensics suits have been going in and out of the property.

Another man, who has lived on the road for more than 20 years, said: "It was loud - we could see the windows shaking, you can hear it from anywhere in the area because I could see many people rushing out of their doors to see what happened."

In the nearby suburb of Chorlton, graphic designer Nick Yates, 27, saw police descend on a man close to the Morrisons shopping centre.

Manchester Arena explosion aftermath - In pictures 35 show all Manchester Arena explosion aftermath - In pictures 1/35 Stephanie Brodie and mother Lisa Brodie who were inside the foyer when the explosion happened Jeremy Selwyn 2/35 Armed police patrol near Victoria station in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 3/35 Police close to the Manchester Arena the morning after a terrorist attack at the end of a concert by Ariana Grande left 22 dead PA 4/35 Prime Minister Theresa May addresses the media in Downing Street Stefan Rousseau/PA 5/35 A police officer moves a floral tribute close to the Manchester Arena PA 6/35 A man embraces a woman and a teenager as he collects them from the Park Inn Hotel where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at the Manchester Arena Getty Images 7/35 Police forensic officers investigate the scene of an explosion at Victoria Station Getty Images 8/35 People affected by the deadly terror attack at Manchester Arena look out from a hotel window in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 9/35 Police stand guard at the scene of a suspected terrorist attack during a pop concert by Ariana Grande in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 10/35 A flag flies at half-mast from the Houses of Parliament AFP/Getty Images 11/35 Mayor of Greater Manchester Andy Burnham and Manchester City Council Leader Sir Richard Leese speak to the media outside Manchester Town Hall after a suicide bomber killed 22 people, including children, as an explosion tore through fans leaving a pop concert in Manchester. PA 12/35 Police forensic investigators walk along a bridge linking Victoria Station with the Manchester Arena where a suspected terrorist attack at the end of a concert Ariana Grande PA 13/35 Tributes left outside St Ann's Church in Manchester Ben Birchall/PA 14/35 The scene at Manchester Royal Infirmary as the death toll from the Manchester bomb attack rose to 22 with 59 injured PA 15/35 Armed police patrol inside Victoria Station adjacent to Manchester Arena Getty Images 16/35 A flag flies at half-mast from the Treasury Office in London AFP/Getty Images 17/35 Tributes left outside St Ann's Church in Manchester PA 18/35 Greater Manchester Police chief constable Ian Hopkins speaks to the media in Manchester where he said that the death toll from the Manchester bomb attack has risen to 22 with 59 injured PA 19/35 Susan Walton and her daughter Katie who attended the pop concert by US star Ariana Grande pose in Mancheste AFP/Getty Images 20/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 21/35 A police officer escorts people near to Manchester Arena Getty Images 22/35 Police stand guard at the scene of a suspected terrorist attack during a pop concert by Ariana Grande in Manchester AFP/Getty Images 23/35 Tributes left outside St Ann's Church in Manchester PA 24/35 A man embraces a woman and a teenager as he collects them from the Park Inn Hotel where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at the Manchester Arena Getty Images 25/35 People leave Victoria Station adjacent to Manchester Arena Getty Images 26/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Karen Moore and her daughter Molly Steed, aged 14, from Derby, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last nights explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 27/35 U.S. President Donald Trump speaks about the attack in Manchester Reuters 28/35 A Union Flag flies above Victoria Railway Station, close to the Manchester Arena Getty Images 29/35 An ambulance arrives as police officers stand at the Miller Street and Corporation Street Crossroads, near the Manchester Arena Getty Images 30/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Vikki Baker and her daughter Charlotte, aged 13, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 31/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Vikki Baker and her daughter Charlotte, aged 13, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 32/35 Ariana Grande concert attendees Vikki Baker and her daughter Charlotte, aged 13, leave the Park Inn where they were given refuge after last night's explosion at Manchester Arena Getty Images 33/35 Home Secretary Amber Rudd arrives for a COBRA meeting in Downing Street Getty Images 34/35 British Defence Secretary Michael Fallon arrives for COBRA meeting at the Cabinet Office on Whitehall Getty Images 35/35 Flags fly at half mast above Downing Street, London, after a suicide bomber killed 22 people, including children, as an explosion tore through fans leaving a pop concert in Manchester PA

"There was a black Mercedes van pulled up on the side of the road with six to eight police officers, all in plain clothes but wearing black caps with checkerboard marking," he said.

"Then as I crossed the road I saw a guy in handcuffs, sat on the floor against the wall."

Greater Manchester Police said they also executed a search warrant at a property in Whalley Range, a mile from the other address.

Officers stood guard outside the entrance of the four-storey building while more uniformed police and detectives in suits could be seen entering the property, with their activity centred on a flat inside.

In a statement made on Tuesday afternoon, Chief Constable Hopkins said: “I can confirm that the man suspected of carrying out last night's atrocity has been named as 22-year-old Salman Abedi. However, he has not yet been formally identified and I wouldn't wish, therefore, to comment further.

"The priority remains to establish whether he was acting alone or as part of a network."

He also expressed his sympathies for the family’s of those who were killed in the attack.

He said: “Can I start by once again passing on our heartfelt sympathies to all the innocent people caught up in last night's despicable act.

"We now have a team of specially-trained Family Liaison Officers who are supporting families.

"As you would expect the police response to this across Greater Manchester has been significant as we support people to go about their daily business.

"Part of this response has seen us arrest a 23-year-old man in connection with the attack and we have also carried out two warrants, one in Whalley Range and one in Fallowfield that included a controlled explosion to enable safe entry.

"We understand that feelings are very raw right now and people are bound to be looking for answers. However, now, more than ever, it is vital that our diverse communities in Greater Manchester stand together and do not tolerate hate.

"We have been visited by the Prime Minster and Home Secretary and we have taken them through the emergency response so far and what we plan to do in future days.”

Some 22 people were killed and at least 59 injured as the explosion rocked the arena.

Among the dead are eight-year-old Saffie Rose Roussos, 18-year-old Georgina Calander and 26-year-old John Atkinson.

Families continued to search frantically for those still missing on Tuesday, many of whom were teenagers.

Chris Upton, headteacher at Tarleton Community Primary School, where the youngest victim was a pupil, said in a statement: “Saffie was simply a beautiful little girl in every aspect of the word.

“She was loved by everyone and her warmth and kindness will be remembered fondly.

“Saffie was quiet and unassuming with a creative flair.”

Georgina was described by friends as “kind and loving”.

Her friend Shelby Wharton, 17, told the Standard: “We were all praying for her to be found safely. Then we were told she had passed away.

“She was always very open, would talk to everyone. She was so nice. It does not feel real. I just pray for her family.”

Theresa May said earlier on Tuesday that police knew the identity of the suicide bomber who deliberately chose a place where he could cause “maximum carnage” when he detonated a bomb at a pop concert in Manchester.

The Prime Minister said that police and security services were working to establish whether he was acting alone or as part of a group.

Mrs May was speaking outside Downing Street after chairing an emergency Cobra meeting in the wake of the attack.

She said it was “beyond doubt” that the people of Manchester and the UK had fallen victim to a “callous terrorist attack”.

But she added that the "cowardice of the attacker was met by the bravery of the emergency services and the people of Manchester".