Hashtag #roomformanchester set up in the wake of attack that left many traumatised people stranded in the city centre • Manchester Arena explosion: latest updates

Manchester attack: city mobilises to help concertgoers with offers of rooms and free rides

Residents of Manchester have mobilised in the hours after the Ariana Grande concert attack, with offers of help for stranded and injured concertgoers flooding Twitter.

The Victoria train station was closed in the wake of the incident, and was expected to remain closed throughout Tuesday, leaving many people stuck in the city centre without a way home. As many as 21,000 people – many of whom were children and teenagers – were at the concert.

Hannah Al-Othman (@HannahAlOthman) Lots of panicked people. Dozens saying they can't get home. No trains out of Manchester at all.

Using the trending hashtag #roomformanchester, locals offered spare bedrooms, cups of tea and rides to people caught up in the attack.

Jesy (@iamjesyrae) #roomformanchester we have a spare double bed and two sofas available if anybody needs a place tonight. Salford area, 5 min taxi from arena

53two (@53two) If you need somewhere to come grab a coffee and await news, head to the arches. We've got the kettle on! #RoomForManchester @GMPCityCentre

Cal (@Panayisalad) Anyone needing a lift/place to stay from the Manchester Arena, tweet #roomformanchester Retweet and get this trending to help.

Nick Q (@QHNick) I live 5 mins from the Manchester Arena. I have sofa bed, food/drink and phone chargers if anyone needs any help #roomformanchester

There were also reports of a hotel in the city centre sheltering children who had become separated from their parents. Facebook turned on its safety check feature.

Taxi drivers reportedly converged on the city offering free lifts to people in need.

The Venue Manchester (@VenueManchester) Taxi's in the centre of Manchester are offering FREE lifts to anyone who can't get home tonight. Please RT & spread the word.

People also used the hashtag to appeal for help in finding friends and family members missing in the aftermath.

Manchester City councillor Bev Craig tweeted that people opening their homes and offering free rides was an example of “the manchester I love.”