Anne Gulland London

Two doctors have been commended for “running towards danger” in response to terrorist incidents in London and Manchester.12

Jeeves Wijesuriya, a GP trainee and chair of the BMA Junior Doctors’ Committee, and Michael Daley, a consultant anaesthetist in Manchester, who were first on the scenes of the attacks were entered into the BMA’s book of valour in a ceremony at this week’s annual representative meeting in Bournemouth. The book is a recognition of distinguished service and includes the names of those who helped after a bomb exploded outside BMA House in 2005, for example.

Wijesuriya had been at a meeting in Westminster on 22 March when he saw a stream of people running away from the Houses of Parliament and, suspecting there might have been a terrorist incident, ran towards the scene.

Wijesuriya was the first person to treat both PC Keith Palmer, stabbed and killed by Khalid Masood, and Masood himself, who was shot by police after driving a car at speed over Westminster Bridge, murdering five people.

Wijesuriya lacked basic equipment but was able to triage and provide immediate care and life support. He said that there was “something beautiful” about the skill, compassion, and teamwork demonstrated by the many NHS staff involved in the response to the attack.

The BMA commended him for running “not towards safety but towards danger. He could not have known the risk he was taking. He acted selflessly, and in the best traditions of his profession.”

Daley, a member of North West Ambulance Service’s medical emergency response team, was at home when he got a call alerting him to an explosion at the Manchester Arena, which was packed with children and young people. Daley, who lives close to the venue, ran to the incident alone, without the usual protection afforded by a rapid response vehicle.

Not knowing what risks awaited him, he is thought to have been the first doctor on the scene and provided triage and directions to others, offering assistance until the on-call teams arrived.

After the attack, which claimed the lives of 22 people, many of whom were children, Daley emphasised that he was just one of many doctors at the scene, from newly qualified trainees to experienced consultants.

The BMA commended Daley and others who “behaved with courage, dedication, and professionalism in response to this terrible incident.”