“WE WON’T take defeat and we don’t want your pity,” roared Tony Walsh, a local poet, at a vigil in Manchester on May 23rd for the 22 people, some of them children, who were murdered in a suicide-bomb attack in the city the previous evening. Muslim charities were present as Sikhs gave out free drinks to the crowd, whose members held placards with slogans such as “Hate does not resolve Hate”. It was a conscious display of unity in the face of Britain’s deadliest terrorist attack since July 7th 2005.

As Mancunians took to the streets, counter-terrorism officers were unpicking the origins of the plot. Lately they have worried about self-radicalised “lone wolf” attackers. In March Khalid Masood, a British convert to Islam, murdered five people in Westminster using only a rental car and a kitchen knife. But it seems that Salman Abedi, a British-born 22-year-old of Libyan stock who detonated the bomb at the Manchester Arena, was not acting alone.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

That prompted Theresa May to raise the terrorist threat assessment to its highest, “critical” level for the first time in ten years, indicating that an attack may be “imminent”. The prime minister’s announcement triggered the deployment of nearly 1,000 troops, whose job is to secure sites such as the Houses of Parliament and thus free up police. Amber Rudd, the home secretary, said the measure was temporary and would be kept under “constant review”. Britain does not want to go down the same road as France, which imposed a state of emergency after terrorist attacks in Paris in November 2015 and has been stuck with it ever since. This week the new president, Emmanuel Macron, called for it to be extended for a further six months.

Mrs May cited “a possibility we cannot ignore that there is a wider group of individuals linked to this attack.” By May 25th eight men had been arrested in Britain, including Mr Abedi’s elder brother, Ismael. His younger brother, Hashem, and father, Ramadan, were detained in Libya by a local militia on May 24th. Mr Abedi himself had recently returned from Libya, where he may have been trained by jihadist groups linked to Islamic State (IS) or al-Qaeda (see article). He was also reportedly in Germany days before the attack.













Police in Manchester have concluded that the explosive device he used was the work of a skilled bomb-maker. It had a back-up means of detonation and seems to have been similar in design to those used by IS-inspired suicide-bombers in Brussels last year.

That much is known because photographs of the bomb’s bloodied fragments were leaked to the New York Times, presumably by American intelligence services. They were published hours after Ms Rudd had criticised the “irritating” leak of Mr Abedi’s identity by American officials. Manchester police have reportedly suspended their sharing of information with American counterparts. Mrs May was due to confront Donald Trump about the matter at a NATO meeting on May 25th. He may use the affair to bolster his own critique of his intelligence service’s leakiness.

At first it appeared likely that someone other than Mr Abedi made the relatively sophisticated explosive device. However, the discovery of bomb-making equipment at the rented flat in Manchester that Mr Abedi briefly occupied before the attack now suggests otherwise. There is also evidence of Mr Abedi shopping for the materials needed to construct the device over a period of several weeks. Police fear that more than one bomb was made and that others may be in the hands of Mr Abedi’s accomplices.

Did Mr Abedi also choose which event to attack or did he receive instructions? The selection of a pop concert has echoes of the Bataclan massacre in Paris. It has become standard practice for IS to target large venues hosting events that symbolise what it regards as Western decadence. In a statement claiming responsibility, it referred to “the shameless concert arena” and described the teenage fans of Ariana Grande as “Crusaders”.

Ms Rudd has said that Mr Abedi was known “up to a point” by MI5, the domestic security service. His friends reportedly warned the authorities about him five years ago; a relative is said to have repeated the concerns. But like Masood, the Westminster killer, he had been regarded as a low-risk, peripheral figure.

Some will question why he was allowed to travel to Libya. Under rules introduced in 2013, a person’s passport can be confiscated on the basis of their “past, present or proposed activities, actual or suspected”. It is a power that Mrs May, home secretary at the time, said should be used sparingly. The reason it was not used in this instance owes more to the difficulty MI5 has in keeping tabs on up to 3,000 people whom it regards as religious extremists.

The security services are well funded (18 months ago they received the money to take on 1,900 employees, a 15% increase in staffing). But 24-hour surveillance is so labour-intensive that only about 10% of the 500 suspects of real concern can be constantly monitored. Even then, there are strict rules about how long such an operation can be conducted if it yields nothing.

Terrorism in Britain is less deadly than in the decades when the Irish Republican Army (IRA) was active (see chart ). Still, in the 18 months to March this year at least 12 terrorist plots were disrupted, according to Dominic Grieve, who chairs the parliamentary Intelligence and Security Committee. More have followed.

Counter-terrorism officers have long worried about the danger posed by Britons returning from Syria, where about 800 went to wage jihad. Many have been killed, but about half are estimated to have returned. If the quickening tempo of plots is any indication, some are trained and hardened fighters with the skills and motivation to carry out attacks at home. Mr Abedi, who is also thought to have travelled to Syria, may have been one of them.

There is no evidence yet that the Manchester attack was timed to disrupt the election on June 8th. Britain has no big far-right party that might benefit from a backlash against Muslims. The clownish English Defence League staged a small demonstration near the Manchester Arena, but its members were shouted down by an angry shopper and moved on by police.

That is not to say there will be no impact on the election. Mrs May’s response was noticeably more sure-footed than her recent manifesto launch (see Bagehot). By contrast Labour’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn, has attended events in support of the IRA and described members of Hamas and Hizbullah as “friends”. Polls had shown the Tories’ lead narrowing. It is not cynical to suggest that the return of terrorism will remind voters why they like Mrs May.

This piece was updated on May 26th to incorporate new information from the investigation.