Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

These are the 22 people who were killed in an explosion at an Ariana Grande concert at Manchester Arena on Monday night.

The youngest victim was only eight-years-old.

Others to have died in the awful attack were teenagers, parents who had gone to pick-up their children, and an off-duty police officer.

Around 120 others were injured in the attack and many are being treated in hospitals across Greater Manchester.

All the victims of the terror attack have now been named.

The M.E.N. has organised a fundraising campaign which has raised more than £1m for the victims' families. To make a donation, click here .

It's important is to remember the innocent victims, and not the terrorist who murdered them.

Who are the victims of the Manchester attack?

Georgina Callander, 18

Georgina Callander , an 18-year-old college student from Lancashire, was the first victim to be identified following the Manchester attack.

Georgina was an Ariana Grande superfan and was enjoying the concert with her friends at the time of the blast.

Many of her friends have paid tribute to the teen, alongside Runshaw College where she was studying, and a number of celebrities.

The MEN has set up a fundraising page to help support the families of the Manchester terror attack victims

Daisy Gill, who was at the concert with her, posted a photograph of them and wrote on Twitter: “Rest in piece Gina my angel, we were both having such an incredible evening and I can’t believe it ended this way. #Manchester #RipGina”

Saffie Rose Roussos, 8

Eight-year-old Saffie Rose Roussos was killed in the attack on Monday night, her school, Tarleton Community Primary School, confirmed.

Saffie, who is thought to be from Tarleton, near Preston in Lancashire, had been at the Ariana Grande concert with her mum Lisa Roussos and sister Ashlee Bromwich when the explosion shook the venue.

Her mum and sister were rushed to hospital, but lost contact with Saffie.

Chris Upton, headteacher at Saffie's school, said in a statement: “Saffie was simply a beautiful little girl in every aspect of the word. She was loved by everyone and her warmth and kindness will be remembered fondly. Saffie was quiet and unassuming with a creative flair.

"The thought that anyone could go out to a concert and not come home is heartbreaking."

John Atkinson, 28

28-year-old John Atkinson from Bury was the third victim to be identified.

It's understood that John had been leaving the concert when a lone man detonated a suicide bomb shortly after 10.30 on Monday evening.

Friends and family have paid their respects to the man they've described as "one in a million."

Taliè Andrèa said: "Heartbroken for the Atkinson family at this sad time never would I imagine this happening so close to home. Rest in paradise John you beautiful soul.”

Megan Hurley, 15

The fourth victim of the suicide bomb attack at Manchester Arena has been named as Megan Hurley.

The fundraising page to help Megan's family was set up by Helen McDermott, from Halewood, who said: “We’re raising £500 to help fund a beautiful send off for Megan who was taken far too early due to the awful attacks at Manchester Arena on 22/05/2017."

Earlier on Tuesday evening a service was held at St Nicholas’ Church in Halewood in memory of the Mnchester bombing victims.

Attending the service was the Chair of Governors of Halewood Primary and he said a young girl who went to the school was killed. He added that the girl’s brother was “seriously injured”.

Olivia Campbell, 15

15-year-old Olivia Campbell was killed in the terror attack, her mother confirmed on Tuesday night - just hours after making a heartbreaking TV appeal to find her.

Olivia hadn't been seen since the suicide bomb blast at Ariana Grande's concert on Monday night.

Paying tribute to her 'precious' daughter, mum Charlotte Campbell said: "RIP my darling precious gorgeous girl Olivia Campbell. Taken far, far too soon. go sing with the angels and keep smiling. Mummy loves you so much."

Alison Howe, 45, and Lisa Lees, 43

Two mums waiting to collect their teenage daughters after the concert were among the victims of the bomb attack.

Alison Howe, 45, and Lisa Lees, 43, from Royton, Oldham, were both waiting in the foyer of the arena when the suicide bomber detonated a home-made device packed with nuts and bolts.

Both were reported missing after the attack. Their families have since confirmed they had died. Their daughters, both aged 15, are understood to be safe.

A friend of both women said she was had been left "broken-hearted" in a moving tribute.

Sarah Barker wrote: "Could not of wished for 2 nicer ladies.

"Alison Howe was the first person to talk to me and make me feel welcome when Sisley started dancing with Darcey you were gorgeous wonderful woman and Lisa Lees what can I say, beautiful inside and out and we must of been sisters as you say my Mum was your second mum."

Angelika and Marcin Klis

Married couple Angelika and Marcin Klis, from York, who went to the Ariana Grande concert together, have been confirmed to have died in the terror attack.

The pair posed for a selfie in the city centre just before going to the concert to pick their daughters up. They were reported missing when nobody heard from them after the concert.

The Polish foreign minister confirmed that two Polish people had been killed and one had been severely injured in the attack.

Marcin was understood to be from Poland originally but worked as a cab driver in York.

Martyn Hett, 29

Corrie superfan Martyn Hett has been named by friends as another victim of the Manchester Arena terror attack.

It’s thought the popular and well-known PR manager, aged 29, was at Monday’s Ariana Grande concert with pals as a leaving party.

His death came two days before he was about to head off on a trip of a life time to the US.

The soap superfan had a Deirdre Barlow tattoo on his leg and once won Come Dine With Me when he appeared on the show with his boyfriend.

His ‘soulmate’ Russell Hayward said: ‘We got the news last night that our wonderful iconic and beautiful Martyn didn’t survive. He left this world exactly how he lived, centre of attention.

‘I’m in a really bad way so please forgive if I don’t reply. Thankfully I have his wonderful family and amazing friends to keep each other strong.

‘I love you, I always will. x’

Kelly Brewster, 32

Kelly Brewster, 32, from Sheffield had been at the Ariana Grande concert with her sister Claire and niece Hollie Booth, but was reported missing following the attack.

Her partner Ian Winslow, wrote this heartbreaking message on Facebook: "Not sure how this works but it isn’t good news. Kelly Brewster wasn’t one of the unidentified hospital patients. She has sadly passed away in the terror attack.

"Kelly really was the happiest she has ever been and we had so many things planned together. My daughter Phoebe will be absolutely devastated like we all are."

Jane Tweddle-Taylor

(Image: https://www.facebook.com/julie.speight.92)

Jane Tweddle-Taylor, from Blackpool had gone to the Arena with a friend. to pick up the friend's daughter She has been confirmed as another victim of the terror attack.

She was a receptionist at South Shore Academy in Blackpool.

Nell Jones, 14

14-year-old Nell Jones, who was at the Ariana Grande concert, has been confirmed among those killed in Monday's attack.

The teenager from Goostrey, near Jodrell Bank Discovery Centre, had been recently using crutches after suffering a ligament injury.

Her family and friends had posted appeals on social media saying she was missing following the concert.

Michelle Kiss

Michelle Kiss, the mum of a little girl pictured being comforted by a police officer outside Manchester Arena, died in the terror attack on Monday night.

Her niece Laura Murray confirmed the news on Facebook this morning.

Michelle had been at the Ariana Grande concert with her young daughter on the night of the explosion.

In a statement released by GMP, her family said: "Family was her life and we are all obviously devastated by her loss. She has been taken away from us, and all that love her, in the most traumatic way imaginable.

"We hope to draw from the courage and strength she showed in her life to get through this extremely difficult time."

Sorrell Leczkowski, 14

(Image: Facebook)

14-year-old Sorrell Leczkowski from Leeds has been named as one of the Manchester terror attack victims.

She reportedly died in hospital with her mum and grandma by her side. They were also injured in the attack.

Friends have paid tribute to Sorrell on social media.

Mark Burton wrote: "Can't get over this sad news! brings it to light when people innocent and close get brought into these sick peoples views.

"Fourteen and not even lived your life yet, you'll be sadly missed by us all."

Liam Curry, 19, and Chloe Rutherford, 17

A young couple killed in the Manchester terror attack ‘wanted to be together forever’, their heartbroken families have said.

Chloe Rutherford, 17, and 19-year-old Liam Curry are the latest victims confirmed dead following the blast at the Manchester Arena on Monday night.

The pair were from South Shields in South Tyneside.

In a joint statement via Greater Manchester Police, their loved ones confirmed their passing, saying ‘their wings were ready, but our hearts were not’.

Elaine McIver

(Image: PA)

Elaine McIver worked as an officer for Cheshire Constabulary and is understood to have been at the arena with her husband Paul.

Paul is understood to be in a critical condition in hospital.

Their children were also injured in the explosion.

A statement said: “Elaine was a much-loved daughter, sister, Auntie, friend and colleague, the best we could ever have wished for.

“She was everyone’s friend, thoughtful beyond belief with an effervescent and outgoing personality.

“She would have been devastated by the injuries sustained by her partner Paul, and we all wish him a speedy recovery.

Wendy Fawell, 50

Primary school teacher Wendy Fawell, from Otley, West Yorkshire, had been missing since Monday's explosion and her family had mounted a frantic campaign to find her.

St Oswald's C of E Primary School, in Guiseley, said on Twitter on Thursday morning: "It is with deepest sadness that I confirm that our former colleague Wendy Fawell was killed in the Manchester bombing. RIP, Wendy."

Ms Fawell, aged 50, was reported to have been about to leave the concert at Manchester Arena with her 15-year-old daughter Charlotte, along with a friend and her sons, when they were caught in the attack.

Eilidh MacLeod, 14

The parents of Eilidh MacLeod have paid tribute to their teenage daughter who died in the Manchester Arena terror attack.

Eilidh, 14, went to the Ariana Grande concert with her friend Laura MacIntyre, 15, on Monday, May 22.

Their families launched urgent appeals when the girls failed to get in touch after the explosion, which has left 22 dead. Laura was later found to be in a “serious condition” in hospital.

In a statement her family said: “Our family is devastated and words cannot express how we feel at losing our darling Eilidh.

“Eilidh was vivacious and full of fun. She loved all music whether it was listening to Ariana or playing the bagpipes with her pipe band.

“As a family we would like to express our thanks and gratitude for the support and kind messages we have received at this difficult time.”

Courtney Boyle, 19

Leeds Beckett University student Courtney Boyle, 19, from Gateshead, had been at the concert with her step-father Philip Tron.

In a statement Courtney's mum said: "My stunning amazing beautiful daughter you were my rock you made me so proud with all you had achieved and my gorgeous crazy Philip you made my world a happy place and now you are both my angels flying high in the sky."

Her dad added: "I am going to miss my baby girl Courtney Boyle for the rest of my life.

I will never forget you and I will love you forever. Grandad Bob misses you loads also."

Philip Tron, 32,

Philip Tron from Gateshead was also tragically killed in the Manchester Arena bombing.

He had been at the concert with his step-daughter Courtney Boyle.

In a statement Philip's mum said: "Firstly, we would like to thank the emergency services, police, nurses, support staff, family & friends and the people of Manchester for their continued help and support which they have given us throughout this harrowing time.

"Our most amazing son, partner, brother, father, uncle, nephew and cousin, Philip Tron, sadly passed away on the 22nd May 2017. Philip was such a fun loving, energetic soul, he would light up the darkest room and lift your spirits with his infectious laugh, witty sense of humour and his beautiful smile."