Police are still looking for this suitcase (Picture: AP)

Salman Abedi was alone during much of the time before the carrying out the Manchester bombing, police said.

He bought most of the components for his suicide device himself, it was revealed tonight.

‘Many of his movements and actions have been carried out alone during the four days from him landing in the country and committing this awful attack,’ Detective Chief Superintendent Russ Jackson said.

But he said it was still possible he was part of a wider network.

Three men have been released without charge since the investigation began one week ago, Det Supt Jackson said. This leaves 11 still in custody.

Abedi on the night of the attack (Picture: PA)

MORE: Two ‘severe’ fires break out in Birmingham affecting multiple buildings

Giving an update, he said: ‘It is vital that we make sure that he is not part of a wider network and we cannot rule this out yet.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘There remain a number of things that concern us about his behaviour prior to the attack and those of his associates which we need to get to the bottom of.

‘We are especially keen to find out why he kept going back to the Wilmslow Road area and we need to find the blue suitcase which he used during these trips.’

More than 1,000 officers have been working on the investigation since the attack last Monday, which killed 22 people.

Police forensics officers work outside the entrance of the Manchester Arena box office (Picture: Getty)

MORE: Student, 21, was raped, stabbed and strangled after being abducted during violent carjacking

‘The scale of the investigation is enormous with over 7,000 entries on our actions log, which captures our lines of enquiry, within the Counter Terrorism Control room,’ he said.

‘We have almost 300 pieces of digital equipment, including phones, which we are working through and hundreds of witnesses to contact and take statements from.

‘Much of the investigation has been painstakingly working through Salman Abedi’s last movements. We have done this by examining his movements on CCTV and other interactions he has had whether it be with people or the phone calls he has made.

‘With specialist support we have also have a good understanding of the likely component parts of the bomb and where these came from.

Police raided the Moss Side area of Manchester as part of the investigation (Picture: PA)

MORE: Fund for Manchester victims nearly at £2,000,000 after big name support

‘Our enquiries show Abedi himself made most of the purchases of the core components and what is becoming apparent is that many of his movements and actions have been carried out alone during the four days from him landing in the country and committing this awful attack.

‘We still have a number of people in custody and we will be seeking to extend the custody of some of them as we work to understand what has gone on and whether Abedi was helped.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘Today we have released without charge two men aged 20 and 24 from the Fallowfield area and a 37-year-old man from the Blackley area.

‘The release of some people can be expected in investigations of this nature as we corroborate accounts that have been provided.

‘We continue to appeal for the public’s help in tracking Abedi’s movements. Calls to us have already significantly helped our understanding of where he has been and what he has had in his possession.’

Anyone with information should call the Anti-Terrorist Hotline in confidence on 0800 789321. If you have any images or footage that you believe can assist then upload them to Ukpoliceimageappeal.co.uk or Ukpoliceimageappeal.com.