Theresa May and the leaders of other political parties have suspended campaigning for the general election following the terrorist attack in Manchester, which has killed at least 22 people.

The prime minister, who had been due to attend a campaign event in south-west England, instead chaired a meeting of the government’s emergency Cobra committee, before making a statement outside Downing Street.

“It is now beyond doubt that the people of Manchester and of this country have fallen victim to a callous terrorist attack, an attack that targeted some of the youngest people in our society with cold calculation,” May said.

Manchester Arena: 8-year-old Saffie Rose Roussos named as second victim of suicide bombing – latest Read more

“This was among the worst terrorist incidents we have ever experienced in the United Kingdom.”

May said she had spoken to the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn. She then left London to travel to Manchester.

It is not known how long the campaign will be suspended for. Senior figures from the various parties are understood to be in discussions over what steps should be taken.

Corbyn, who was due to speak in the West Midlands, said it was a “terrible incident”. He added: “I have spoken with the prime minister and we have agreed that all national campaigning in the general election will be suspended until further notice.”

In a later statement, the Labour leader said those who experienced the horror would need long-term support.

“We have to give them all the support we possibly can, and also make sure we live in a safe environment in the future, and we live in safety together,” he said. “But we do not allow our communities to be divided by this kind of appalling, atrocious act of violence.”

The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, cancelled a planned speech to the annual conference of the Public and Commercial Services union in Brighton.

The Scottish National party was due to unveil its election manifesto on Tuesday but postponed the event. The SNP leader and Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon – who expressed her condolences to the victims of the attack – will instead chair a meeting of the devolved government’s resilience committee.

Nicola Sturgeon (@NicolaSturgeon) Heartbreaking news from Manchester. My thoughts are with all those who have lost loved ones or been injured in this barbaric attack.

The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, cancelled a planned campaign visit to Gibraltar, where he was to speak about Brexit and meet overseas voters.

Farron said: “This is a shocking and horrific attack targeting children and young people who were simply enjoying a concert. My deepest sympathies are with the victims, and with families who have lost loved ones, as well as those desperately waiting for news. I would like to pay tribute to the bravery and dedication of the emergency services.”

Paul Nuttall, the leader of Ukip, said his party would be halting its election campaign. The MEP for the north-west of England said: “Just woken to the terrible news in the heart of my constituency, Manchester. My prayers and thoughts are with those affected. Stay strong.

“In light of what’s happened I have suspended the Ukip general election campaign.”

Caroline Lucas, co-leader of the Greens, said: “Heartbreaking news from Manchester. Our thoughts with those affected and thanks as ever to emergency services.”

The Greens confirmed they were suspending all election activities, including the planned manifesto launch by the Welsh Greens. The other co-leader, Jonathan Bartley, said: “For young people to be targeted in this way is utterly atrocious. As ever our emergency services have done us proud – and we pay tribute to the police, firefighters and paramedics who stepped up in this time of need. Our country will never be divided by terror.”

Arlene Foster, the leader of the Democratic Unionist party, said all its candidates would suspend election activities in the light of the attack, adding: “Terrorism must never win.”

The Plaid Cymru leader, Leanne Wood, joined the other parties in halting campaigning.



“The thoughts and sympathies of all of us in Plaid Cymru go out to all the people affected by last night’s horrific events in Manchester,” Wood said. “We will be suspending our campaigning today as a mark of respect to all of the families.”