Some of the evidence presented to the grand jury appeared to support Officer Darren Wilson's statement that he shot unarmed Michael Brown in self-defense — but other details seemed to cast doubt on the cop's account.

In announcing Monday that a grand jury in Ferguson, Mo., voted not to indict the white officer in the highly charged killing of the black teen, St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Bob McCulloch discussed important elements of the evidence.

EDITORIAL: Full facts on Ferguson required in wake of grand jury decision

Speaking at length during a nationally televised press conference, McCulloch described a miscellany of sometimes-conflicting accounts of the 90 fateful seconds that passed between the moment Wilson spotted Brown and a pal walking in a roadway in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson around midday on Aug. 9, to the volley of 12 rounds that left the 18-year-old dead in the same street.

Wilson testified before the grand jury, according to transcripts released Monday night, that before he fired, the teenager slammed the door of his police cruiser on him, prompting him to draw his gun. "I said, 'Get back or I'm going to shoot you,' " Wilson testified.” He immediately grabs my gun and says, 'You are too much of a pu--y to shoot me.'"

An evidence photo of Officer Darren Wilson was released Monday. (Reuters) A St. Louis County Prosecutor's Office photo shows Darren Wilson shortly after the Aug. 9 shooting. (REUTERS) These evidence photos were part of the evidence presented to the grand jury. (Reuters) Evidence was released Monday night after it was announced that Darren Wilson was not indicted. (Reuters)

Wilson was aware that Brown was wanted for stealing cigars from a convenience store minutes earlier. That point had been in dispute since Ferguson police released a video of the convenience store and said Wilson had known Brown was a suspect — only to have the police chief retract that statement not long after, saying the cop didn't make the stop in relation to the theft.

SEE IT: ALL EVIDENCE RELEASED BY ST. LOUIS COUNTY PROSECUTOR BOB MCCULLOCH

Wilson, in his grand jury testimony, said Brown charged his police car. "The only way I can describe it, it looks like a demon, that's how angry he looked," Wilson told the panel, according to the transcript.

Other details also appeared to align in Wilson's favor.

The first two shots were fired when the officer was still sitting in his vehicle, leaving blood inside the car as well as on Wilson's pants.

"Mr. Brown's blood or DNA were found on the outside of the door," the prosecutor said.

That appeared to support Wilson's statement that Brown tried to strip him of his weapon during the altercation that followed the teen's alleged charging. Brown was 6-foot-4 and 292 pounds, and Wilson said he feared for his safety — yet the cop himself is an inch taller and 210 pounds.

RELATED: PARENTS OF MICHAEL BROWN TO MET WITH REV. AL SHARPTON

Grand jury decision sparks violent outrage in Ferguson

Wilson testified that Brown punched him in the head after the door-slam, causing him to fear for his life. The teen took off after the first two shots but then stopped, the officer said.

"His right (hand) goes under his shirt in his waistband and he starts running at me," Wilson told the jurors. "I tell, keep telling him to go to the ground. He doesn't. I shoot a series of shots. I don't know how many I shot."

In Wilson’s account, Brown keeps charging at him as he fired: “At this point it looked like he was almost bulking up to run through the shots, like it was making him mad that I'm shooting at him.”

Ten shots were fired from outside of the police car.

Ferguson, Mo., Police Officer Darren Wilson was not indicted by a grand jury. (Reuters)

Wilson told the panel that, with the charging Brown about eight to 10 feet away from him, he aimed a final shot at his head.

“When he fell, he fell on his face,” the cop testified. “And I remember his feet coming up, like he had so much momentum carrying him forward that when he fell, his feet kind of came up a little bit and then they rested.”

RELATED: NYC PROTESTERS MARCH TO TIMES SQUARE, BLOCK BRIDGE TRAFFIC

Wilson added: “I’ve never seen that much aggression so quickly from a simple request to just walk on the sidewalk.”

I tell, keep telling him to go to the ground. He doesn’t. I shoot a series of shots. I don’t know how many I shot.

McCulloch said that Wilson suffered "some swelling and redness to his face" — potential evidence that he was punched. Hospital photos shown to the grand jury depicted a minimally injured Wilson with some discoloration on his right cheek and the back of his neck.

Other findings noted by McCulloch and documented in the evidence raised questions about the shooting and Wilson's account.

Brown's body was found 153 feet away from the vehicle. That suggests, as witnesses said, that Brown was fleeing from the cop when bullets cut him down.

Whether Brown was in flight or had attempted to surrender — some witnesses said his arms were up in the air at one point — was the subject of much speculation as Brown's death roiled Ferguson over the past three-plus months.

St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Bob McCulloch laid out the sometimes-conflicting accounts of the events leading up to Brown's Aug. 9 death. (Piaget Crenshaw/CNN)

"The description of how Mr. Brown raised his hands is not consistent between witnesses," McCulloch noted, however.

He said one witness described the teen's movement as "a full charge" toward the officer, before the first shots were fired, while others said he raised his hands only briefly; and others admitted they didn't see the entire encounter. The witnesses who described Brown as advancing on Wilson were African-American, the prosecutor added.

RELATED: OBAMA URGES PEACE, ASKS POLICE TO SHOW RESTRAINT

Brown was struck six times, with some of the gunshot wounds consistent with his body being "bent forward at the waist," McCulloch said.

The description of how Mr. Brown raised his hands is not consistent between witnesses.

McCulloch said the grand jury, consisting of nine whites and three blacks, met for roughly 70 hours and heard evidence from some 60 witnesses. He described the jurors as "engaged," adding that they specifically asked for certain evidence and confronted witnesses with inconsistencies between their testimony and physical evidence.

Five potential charges were presented to the grand jury, from first-degree murder to involuntary manslaughter.

Typically, a grand jury panel hears evidence that points at the existence of probable cause that a crime was committed and almost always votes to indict. This one was presented with the entirety of evidence, and prosecutors did not recommend a particular charge be considered, as is the norm.

That St. Louis County prosecutors took such a different tack was the subject of criticism, with some accusing the office of shielding Wilson from a criminal rap.

Police officers stand guard Monday as protesters in Missouri react to the announcement of the grand jury decision not to indict Officer Darren Wilson in the fatal shooting of Michael Brown. (David Goldman/AP) Demonstrators react after learning that the police officer who shot dead 18-year-old Michael Brown will not face charges, outside the police station in Ferguson, Mo. (JEWEL SAMAD/AFP/Getty Images)

McCulloch defended his handling of the matter and release of the material. He said that the case is no longer pending, so there was no reason to withhold the evidence.

"It is now a closed investigation," the prosecutor said.

The U.S. Justice Department is conducting a separate civil rights investigation.

Asked of his thoughts about the incident, Wilson said: "I think I'm just kind of in shock of what just happened, I really didn't believe it.”

oyaniv@nydailynews.com

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE VIDEO.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!