To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation Guidelines and FAQs

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

Dr. Michael Baden has finished his testimony before the grand jury determining if charges should be filed against Ferguson Officer Darren Wilson.

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

Dr. Michael Baden has finished his testimony before the grand jury determining if charges should be filed against Ferguson Officer Darren Wilson.

1812 CONNECT 150 TWEET LINKEDIN 16 COMMENT EMAIL MORE

ST. LOUIS COUNTY – Dr. Michael Baden has finished – Dr. Michael Baden has finished his testimony before the grand jury determining if charges should be filed against Ferguson Officer Darren Wilson.

He arrived at the St. Louis County Justice Center around 9 a.m. before a news conference was held by attorneys representing 18-year-old Michael Brown's family.

The attorneys for the family of Michael Brown held a news conference Thursday morning in front of the St. Louis Justice Center.

Attorney Anthony Gray said Brown's family wants to align themselves with Gov. Jay Nixon's speech on Tuesday, asking for supporters to refrain from violence when the grand jury announcement is made.

"We want to make it very clear, that on behalf of the Brown family, we do not condone any acts of rioting, looting, or violence, and that we want to encourage all of those who support the Justice for Michael Brown to remain vigilant, yet peaceful, calm, and dignified as we await and after we receive the announcement of the grand jury decision," said Gray.

Gray also asked for police to use "reasonable restraints" with demonstrators.

Benjamin Crump, an attorney for the Michael Brown family, answers reporters questions after reading a statement from the family at the Justice Center in Clayton, Missouri on November 13, 2014, in response to a press conference held earlier in the week by Governor Jay Nixon. (Photo: BILL GREENBLATT, UPI) Fullscreen Anthony Gray, an attorney for the Michael Brown family, reads a statement from the family at the Justice Center in Clayton, Missouri on November 13, 2014, in response to a press conference held earlier in the week by Governor Jay Nixon. (Photo: BILL GREENBLATT, UPI) Fullscreen Anthony Gray, an attorney for the Michael Brown family, exits the Justice Center in Clayton, Missouri on November 13, 2014, to read a statement to reporters, in response to a press conference held earlier in the week by Governor Jay Nixon. On November 11, Nixon outlined a plan to deal with the possibility of protests. (Photo: BILL GREENBLATT, UPI) Fullscreen Anthony Gray, an attorney for the Michael Brown family, reads a statement from the family at the Justice Center in Clayton, Missouri on November 13, 2014, in response to a press conference held earlier in the week by Governor Jay Nixon. On November 11, Nixon outlined a plan to deal with the possibility of protests. (Photo: BILL GREENBLATT, UPI) Fullscreen Like this topic? You may also like these photo galleries: Replay





1 of 4 Autoplay Show Thumbnails Show Captions Last SlideNext Slide

"Regardless of the decision of the grand jury, this will be a defining moment in the history of the state of Missouri," said attorney Benjamin Crump.

Crump also said he and others believe "there is evidence that shows Michael Brown had his hands up." He was asked if there's any doubt, and Crump responded, "there's no doubt about that."

He also said Baden found an additional entry wound on Brown's chest.

"The only thing that Dr. Baden had wished to express to Michael Brown's parents, in that his preliminary autopsy he was not able to determine if the shots to the chest were re-entry wounds or entry wounds. He was able to confirm along with some of the materials from the medical examiner's office. There was an additional entry wound into his chest. It was not a re-entry wound," said Crump.

Benjamin Crump, one of the attorneys representing the family of Michael Brown, says that according to the pathologist, there was an additional bullet entry wound in Brown's chest. VPC

Baden performed one of three autopsies on Brown after he was shot and killed by Wilson Aug. 9. He was hired by Brown's family to conduct an independent autopsy.

When Baden finished his three-hour testimony he was asked for comment while leaving the justice center.

"I can't say anything," said Baden.

In his report made public in August, Baden said Brown was shot at least six times and found no signs of a struggle.

St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Bob McCulloch said in previous interviews with NewsChannel 5 he will not comment on who testifies before the grand jury, and called so-called leaks speculation.

Pathologist Dr. Michael Baden arrives to testify before a St. Louis County grand jury.

Contributing: Ryan Dean.

1812 CONNECT 150 TWEET LINKEDIN 16 COMMENT EMAIL MORE

Read or Share this story: http://on.ksdk.com/1qFlb5q