The officer who fatally gunned down Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., described to the grand jury how the unarmed teen overpowered and taunted him.

“I drew my gun,” Officer Darren Wilson recalled. “I said, ‘Get back or I’m going to shoot you.’ He immediately grabs my gun and says, ‘You are too much of a pu–y to shoot me.’ ”

The officer said he was sitting in his patrol car when he drew his firearm after Brown slugged him twice in the face through an open window. They proceeded to struggle over the weapon and Wilson — who is 6 feet 4 — said he was overmatched.

“When I grabbed him, the only way I can describe it, I felt like a 5-year-old holding on to Hulk Hogan,” Wilson said. “That’s just how big he felt and how small I felt.”

The encounter began when Wilson, 28, witnessed two men walking down the middle of the street after they had stolen cigarillos from a convenience store.

“What the f- -k are you going to do about it?” Brown yelled at the cop as he tried to exit his car, Wilson recalled.

In his testimony, the officer recalled the fury and rage unleashed on him by Brown.

“The only way I can describe it, is it looks like a demon,” the officer said. “That’s how angry he looked.”

Wilson told grand jurors he was concerned that another punch to his face could “knock me out or worse.”

But photos of Wilson’s injuries released with the grand jury document Monday night showed only slight redness.

After the slug-fest, Wilson reached for his weapon and Brown grabbed it and pressed it into the officer’s hip while reaching for the trigger, according to the testimony.

“At that point, I thought I was getting shot,” Wilson said. “I distinctly remember envisioning a bullet going into my leg. I thought that was the next step.”

Two shots were fired from inside the vehicle following the struggle, and Brown ran off. After radioing for help, Wilson took off after Brown and his accomplice.

“My main goal was to keep eyes on him and keep him contained until I had people coming there,” Wilson testified.

But then Brown charged at him and the officer fired repeatedly, he said — describing how he fired the fatal shot to Brown’s head as Brown continued to charge him.

“I saw the last one go into him,” Wilson said. “It went into him, the demeanor on his face went blank, the aggression was gone.”

State of Missouri v. Darren Wilson by New York Post