CLOSE Dorian Johnson was walking with Michael Brown when the 18-year-old was shot and killed by a police officer in St. Louis County, Missouri. Johnson says Brown had his hands in the air, and was unarmed, when the cop shot him. VPC

Dorian Johnson said he was walking with Michael Brown on Aug. 9, 2014, when a Ferguson, Mo., officer fatally shot the unarmed teen. (Photo: KSDK-TV, St. Louis)

FERGUSON, Mo. — Minutes before teen Michael Brown was fatally shot by a local police officer, a friend he was walking with said the pair was a short distance from home.

Dorian Johnson said he was standing inches from Brown when the shooting occurred around 1:40 p.m. Saturday. He gave his account of the shooting to KSDK-TV.

"The officer is approaching us and as he pulled up on the side of us, he didn't say freeze, halt or anything like we were committing a crime. He said, 'Get the F on the sidewalk.'

After Johnson said the officer thrust open the door of his patrol car, hitting the pair, Johnson said the officer grabbed Brown around the neck and tried to pull him through the window. He said Brown never tried to reach for the officer's weapon.

"The second time he says, 'I'll shoot,' a second later the gun went off and he let go," Johnson said. "That's how we were able to run at the same time. The first car I see, I ducked behind for because I fear for my life. I'm scared. I don't know what's going on. I don't understand why this officer is shooting his weapon at us."

According to Johnson, the officer pursued Brown and fired another shot. which struck Brown in the back. He said Brown turned and faced the officer with his hands raised.

"My friend started to tell the officer that he was unarmed and that he could stop shooting (him)," Johnson said. "Before he could get his second sentence out, the officer fired several more shots into his head and chest area. He fell dramatically into the fatal position. I did not hear once he yell freeze, stop or halt. it was just horrible to watch."

Johnson said he could tell Brown was in pain after the shooting.

"It hurt him a lot," he said. "I could see it in his eyes. It was definitely like being shot like an animal.

"I definitely think (the officer) is guilty of murder."

Johnson, who is expected to be interviewed by the FBI Wednesday, said he moved from his apartment with his girlfriend and young daughter because he feared retaliation from police.

"I left because I feared that if I stayed, something would happen to me. I felt like if they would have gotten me, they would have done anything possible to make sure I couldn't come forth and give my side of what happened."

On Tuesday, about a mile away from where the shooting took place, protests erupted for the third night in a row in Ferguson, but were largely peaceful, with several young pulling their shirts up to cover their faces.

A confrontation with police ended with police once again firing tear gas into the crowd. Police said they were responding to protesters who had thrown bottles at officers, according to CNN.

Tensions increased in the community on Tuesday when authorities, backing down on an earlier promise to to release the name of the white police officer who killed the unarmed Brown.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ouowHT