“I have absolutely no intention of walking away from the duties and responsibilities entrusted to me by the people in this community,” Mr. McCulloch, 63, told the station. “I have done it for 24 years, and I’ve done, if I do say so myself, a very good job.”

Mr. McCulloch, who is white, is well respected by his peers, serving previously as president of the Missouri Association of Prosecuting Attorneys and the National District Attorneys Association. And he has proved to be popular at the polls: This month, he won his Democratic primary race by a 30-point margin.

As the county’s top lawman, he pushed for legislation that made criminals serve longer portions of their sentences, and has fought back attacks against his trial conviction rate by noting that his conviction rate soars when plea bargains are counted.

Mr. McCulloch declined interview requests.

His executive assistant and spokesman, Edward Magee, said Mr. McCulloch had not spoken to the governor on the issue.

“His feeling is that he has been the elected prosecutor since 1991 and has been re-elected every four years since by a vast majority of the voters, including this past Aug. 5,” Mr. Magee said. “The voters and county have great faith in Mr. McCulloch, and he will continue to carry out his duties. He doesn’t let what happened in 1964 affect what happens in this office.”

Mr. Magee said his boss had prosecuted plenty of police officers for a variety of crimes, but he could not say how many had been charged with excessive force or wrongful shootings.

Photo

Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri and a former prosecutor, has defended Mr. McCulloch, whom she has known for more than 20 years. If she were governor, she said, she would not remove him. “I believe that Bob McCulloch will be fair,” Ms. McCaskill said Tuesday on MSNBC.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Early in his career, Mr. McCulloch gained notoriety when he prosecuted Axl Rose, the frontman of Guns N’ Roses, for allegedly assaulting a security guard during a concert melee. But the current case has brought the most attention toward Mr. McCulloch in his career.

The Aug. 9 killing of Mr. Brown, 18, by Officer Darren Wilson, who is white, roiled the African-American community, and residents have taken to the streets in ways both peaceful and violent.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The county’s investigation fell to Mr. McCulloch. With pressure mounting, he announced that he would not make a decision to arrest the officer himself but would instead present the case to a grand jury. Many critics oppose the use of grand juries because they believe that route allows prosecutors to present halfhearted cases without anyone finding out.

A jury empaneled since May, and whose term is expected to be extended until mid-October, began hearing evidence here in the Brown case on Wednesday. Officer Wilson will be invited to testify before the grand jury, Mr. McCulloch’s office said.

Some critics have raised questions about Mr. McCulloch’s impartiality, citing his long history of taking tough law-and-order stances in police shooting cases. His mother was a secretary in the homicide bureau of the St. Louis Police for 20 years, and his uncle, brother and cousin were all officers. In 2001, he referred to two unarmed men shot by the police as “bums.”

“Nobody thinks Michael Brown can get a fair shake from this guy,” said Antonio French, a St. Louis alderman who has become a vocal critic. “There is very little faith, especially in the black community, that there would ever be a fair trial.”

Mr. French said some people were still smarting from this month’s Democratic primary election, in which Mr. McCulloch ran negative campaign ads against an incumbent African-American county executive. The county executive lost to a white challenger, whom Mr. McCulloch had endorsed. The prosecutor had long been known as a party upstart who was always willing to endorse new candidates despite the party line.

Some in the area remember Mr. McCulloch for a 2001 episode called the “Jack in the Box case,” in which two undercover officers shot and killed two drug suspects who they said had tried to run them over in a bid to escape.

The issue of whether the car was moving forward or in reverse was in dispute, and Mr. McCulloch was strongly criticized for referring to the dead men as “bums.” He later said that the killings could have been averted if the drug suspects had just surrendered. The case was presented to a grand jury, which declined to indict.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This community right now is in turmoil; the only way to calm these tensions and reduce unrest is to remove Bob McCulloch from this case,” State Senator Jamilah Nasheed said. “People don’t have trust in him that he would do the right thing in this case.”

In a letter asking him to recuse himself, Ms. Nasheed suggested that the violent death of Mr. McCulloch’s father would probably cloud his judgment. When asked about that potential conflict in past interviews, Mr. McCulloch dismissed the suggestion as “myopic.”

Mr. McCulloch said questions about his ability to serve had become a “tragic distraction.” Mr. Brown’s parents, he said, deserve better.