The jurors met on 25 days and heard some 70 hours of testimony. To bring a criminal indictment against Officer Wilson, nine of the 12 jurors would have had to agree. The vote remains secret.

The thousands of pages of testimony made public last month showed that the forensic evidence and some witnesses’ accounts were consistent with Officer Wilson’s description that he shot Mr. Brown because the teenager was charging forward in a threatening way, and that Mr. Brown’s hands were not raised to the sky but were at his sides. He also said Mr. Brown had one hand in his waistband.

The testimony around this critical moment shows that the prosecutors often treated Officer Wilson’s account as the truth, as did the jurors at times, leaving questions unasked.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But many witnesses contested all or parts of the account. They said Mr. Brown had seemed to be trying to give up and had been stumbling toward Officer Wilson, perhaps hobbled by his injuries, before the fatal shots were fired. The evidence still left critical questions about Mr. Brown’s final moments — whether his hands were raised and whether he was walking, staggering, running or charging at the officer when he was shot dead.

The witness accounts on Monday were statements made to federal investigators who are pursuing their own possible civil rights case against the officer.

The new documents did not seem to include a two-hour F.B.I. and county police interview with Michael Brown’s friend Dorian Johnson, which the television station had called conspicuously missing. Most of the information released Monday was previously known, and some of the documents had already been released.

The parallel investigation by the Department of Justice became a vital part of the grand jury proceedings, as prosecutors regularly played audio clips or asked jurors to read testimony given to Department of Justice officials — and then often used those statements to impeach testimony before the grand jury.

There were also occasional signs of tension or confusion. Jurors asked why some witnesses refused to be interviewed by the local police and only by the F.B.I., leading prosecutors to declare at one point that jurors would have to ask the Department of Justice.

The records also included more than 50 brief recordings of conversations involving a police dispatcher and police officers responding to the events that night. Previously, transcripts had been released but not the recordings. In one, a dispatcher notified patrol cars that a man, later identified as Mr. Brown, had left a store after taking a box of cigarillos.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s going to be a black male in a white T-shirt,” the dispatcher says over the radio. “He’s running toward Quik Trip. He took a whole box of Swisher cigars.”