The intense focus on Officer Wilson’s actions — old and new — marks a jarring change for a man who, over most of his 28 years, had left a muted, barely noticeable trail behind. While protesters have marched nightly, a grand jury has begun hearing evidence, and supporters of the officer have raised more than $350,000 for him. Officer Wilson himself has vanished from public view, leaving his ranch home where letters on red, white and blue stars hung from a door spell out “Welcome” in a town southwest of St. Louis; he is believed to be under police protection.

Photo

Officer Wilson, who is divorced, was born in Texas but has spent most of his years in these suburbs that surround St. Louis, records show. Family members, friends, colleagues and a lawyer have mostly refused to speak publicly about him, yet those who do paint a portrait of a well-mannered, relatively soft-spoken, even bland person who seemed, if anything, to seek out a low profile — perhaps, some suggested, a reaction to a turbulent youth in which his mother was repeatedly divorced, convicted of financial crimes and died of natural causes before he finished high school in 2004.

“He was a good kid but also a nondescript kid,” said Barney Brinkmann, who coached ice hockey at St. Charles West High School, where some who knew Officer Wilson say he narrowly got enough ice time his senior year to earn a varsity letter. A former next-door neighbor in the small city of Troy, an hour northwest of St. Louis, where Officer Wilson and his former wife lived for about a year, said he recalled Officer Wilson grilling outside from time to time and never causing trouble. And in Crestwood, southwest of St. Louis, where records show that Officer Wilson now lives with Barbara Spradling, a fellow police officer, neighbors said they rarely made much conversation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As a teenager, Darren Wilson lived in St. Peters, Mo., a mostly white city of 54,000 about 20 miles west of Ferguson, where his environment was chaotic. He was the eldest of three children of Tonya Dee Durso, who, records show, carried out financial crimes, including against Sandra Lee Finney, who lived across the street and had believed they were friends.

“It’s a terrible thing that has happened now, but he did have a troubled childhood,” Ms. Finney said in an interview, adding that Officer Wilson’s family had somewhat awkwardly stayed in the neighborhood — moving just one door down — even after his mother was convicted of stealing and forgery in 2001.

After her bank informed her that it was freezing her accounts, Ms. Finney said she learned that numerous credit cards had been opened in her name, her mail was being stolen, her phones were secretly forwarded across the street, and the thief had managed to obtain her driver’s license and a copy of the key to her front door. Among the purchases: tens of thousands of dollars of candles; home decorations; furniture; clothes, including some from American Eagle Outfitters, which Ms. Finney says was Officer Wilson’s favorite store at the time; and hockey gear.

“All the while, she’d come over and sit at my kitchen table to chat and say how she would help me with this terrible thing that was happening to us,” Ms. Finney said of Ms. Durso, whom she described as a thin, blonde woman who seemed upper-middle class. “What hurt me more than all of it was what she did to those kids.”

Photo

Ms. Durso pleaded guilty and was sentenced to probation. Not long after, in 2002, when Officer Wilson was a sophomore in high school, Ms. Durso died at age 35 and one of his stepfathers was granted guardianship until he finished high school. An obituary cited natural causes.

Years later, Ms. Finney said she was stunned when she saw her former neighbor appear outside the old house in a police uniform. “My husband and I thought, ‘How did he get to be a police officer?’ ”

After attending the police academy, Officer Wilson began work in Jennings, another suburb, in June 2009. Robert Orr, the former chief of the Jennings Police Department, said he had no recollection of Officer Wilson and had to call the mayor last week to jog his memory. “Sure enough, the mayor said he was one of ours,” Mr. Orr said. “That must mean he never got in any trouble, because that’s when they usually came to me.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Yet Officer Wilson’s formative experiences in policing came in a department that wrestled historically with issues of racial tension, mismanagement and turmoil. During Officer Wilson’s brief tenure, another officer was fired for a wrongful shooting, and a lieutenant was accused of stealing federal funds. In 2011, in the wake of federal and state investigations into the misuse of grant money, the department closed, and the city entered into a contract to be policed by the county. The department was found to have used grant money to pay overtime for D.W.I. checkpoints that never took place.

When the department folded, the county hired 12 of the roughly 40 officers who worked in Jennings. Mr. Wilson was not among them. Instead, in October 2011, he went to Ferguson, where he now makes $45,302 a year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There, Chief Thomas Jackson has reported no disciplinary actions against him. “He was a gentle, quiet man,” the chief said. “He was a distinguished officer.”

An Outlier for Arrest Warrants Data from municipal courts across Missouri show that in 2013, the city of Ferguson had the highest number of warrants issued in the state relative to its size. Arrest warrants are often served by municipal courts when someone fails to appear in court to pay fines for a traffic or other violation, like shoplifting, assault or disturbance of peace. The high rate could reflect more crime as well as heavier prosecution, and it could be indicative of a fraught relationship between law enforcement and citizens. Brendan Roediger, an assistant professor at Saint Louis University School of Law and supervisor of the school’s Civil Litigation Clinic, said that resentment toward the police in Ferguson “is primarily formed around these interactions and not around investigations of serious crimes.” FERGUSON 1,500 Ferguson issued more than 1,500 per 1,000 people in 2013. Numbers include people being served more than one warrant in a year or nonresidents being served for a violation within the city. 1,000 JENNINGS ST. ANN HAZELWOOD 500 ST. LOUIS Warrants Issued Per 1,000 People in 2013 Each bar represents a Missouri city larger than 10,000 people KANSAS CITY Darker bars are cities in St. Louis County SPRINGFIELD COLUMBIA Data from municipal courts across Missouri show that in 2013, the city of Ferguson had the highest number of warrants issued in the state relative to its size. Arrest warrants are often served by municipal courts when someone fails to appear in court to pay fines for a traffic or other violation, like shoplifting, assault or disturbance of peace. The high rate could reflect more crime as well as heavier prosecution, and it could be indicative of a fraught relationship between law enforcement and citizens. Brendan Roediger, an assistant professor at Saint Louis University School of Law and supervisor of the school’s Civil Litigation Clinic, said that resentment toward the police in Ferguson “is primarily formed around these interactions and not around investigations of serious crimes.” Warrants Issued Per 1,000 People in 2013 FERGUSON 1,500 Each bar represents a Missouri city larger than 10,000 people Darker bars are cities in St. Louis County Ferguson issued more than 1,500 per 1,000 people in 2013. Numbers include people being served more than one warrant in a year or nonresidents being served for a violation within the city. 1,000 JENNINGS ST. ANN HAZELWOOD 500 ST. LOUIS KANSAS CITY SPRINGFIELD COLUMBIA

Yet on the streets of Ferguson, some residents say they question the very environment that Officer Wilson was functioning in, and they argue that inappropriate stops have become pervasive. Data on municipal courts across Missouri in 2013 — gathered by a nonprofit group, ArchCity Defenders, as well as The New York Times — show that relative to the size of the city, Ferguson had the highest rate of warrants issued in the state among cities larger than 5,000 people, as well as some of the highest rates of fines collected and nontraffic violation cases filed.

In the case involving Mr. Brooks, for which Officer Wilson won a commendation, Mr. Brooks’s family questioned what probable cause had led to the arrest, and said there were similarities to Michael Brown’s circumstances. Mr. Brooks was just sitting in a car in his grandmother’s driveway when Officer Wilson confronted him, his relatives say.

On Sunday, a spokesman for the city declined to comment on the case. In the formal presentation of the commendation this year, Chief Jackson read, as Officer Wilson stood before him: “In recognition of outstanding police work while investigating a suspicious vehicle call, acting alone you struggled with one subject and was able to gain control of the subject and his car keys until assistance arrived.”

Family members who were present during the arrest declined to comment or did not return calls. Mr. Brooks himself responded by text message: “I would love to but I gotta talk to my lawyer.”

Family members who had heard descriptions from others said that Mr. Brooks had refused the officer’s order to get out of his car. Then, when he was finally out of the vehicle, Georgia Austin, his grandmother, said, Mr. Brooks locked the car and refused to open it for Officer Wilson. “His mama said that’s when the cop arrested him,” Ms. Austin said.

Ms. Stewart, Mr. Brooks’s aunt, said that he had been hurt while being handcuffed. As a large person, she said, he had been unable to place his hands comfortably behind his body.

In the end, Ms. Austin, 73, said, she was upset both with the officer and with her grandson. She said he had denied having drugs, but she was not sure whom to believe.