Supporters have created dueling donation pages for Michael Brown, the 18-year-old gunned down in Ferguson, Mo., and for police Officer Darren Wilson, who shot the teen dead 12 days ago.

The page for the 28-year-old Wilson, who has been on paid leave since the shooting, has raised nearly $150,000 in just three days to help the man’s family with “any financial needs they may have including legal fees.”

In seven days, nearly $130,000 has been raised for Brown’s family to assist “with costs that they will acquire as they seek justice on Michael’s behalf.” The teen’s funeral has been scheduled for Monday.

The killing of Brown, who was black, by Wilson, who is white, has set off more than 10 days of protests that have included peaceful demonstrations, some looting, fires and scores of arrests.

Some questioned the police response after heavily armed officers patrolled the streets, in some instances firing canisters of tear gas to disperse demonstrators.

A rally held Sunday evening supported Wilson, with some 100 people coming out waving signs in St. Louis to back the police officer, who has gone into hiding since the shooting.

In just three days, thousands of people have donated to support the police officer in the case. (gofundme.com)

A “Support Darren Wilson” Facebook page has some 52,000 likes. Another rally of Wilson’s supporters is scheduled for this weekend in St. Louis.

Supporters of Wilson who joined Wednesday’s protest in Ferguson were angrily met by several demonstrators, including at least one who was arrested.

The death has brought issues of race out into the open in the St. Louis suburb, which is a majority black city but has mostly white police officers and city council members.

Among the donors to the Wilson fund page was someone who gave $5 and signed his or her name as “Rosa Parks.”

“I would have went to the back of the bus for you, Officer Wilson!” the person wrote.

Michael Brown was shot dead Aug. 9. (Big'mike Jr Brown via Facebook) Officer Darren Wilson has been in hiding since his name was released during the investigation. (Facebook/Facebook)

Several other comments from donors are racially tinged, but some said they simply supported the police as law enforcers and urged Wilson to keep his head up through the investigation.

“You have many supporters who appreciate and thank you for you service,” one wrote. “Stay strong Officer Wilson.”

On the Brown page, created by family attorney Benjamin L. Crump’s office, nearly 5,000 people gave money to help the teen's kin.

“May his family some day recover from their heart break and may his legacy live on,” one donor wrote.

A second page created for the Mike Brown College Scholarship promises money raised will go towards the college educations of Brown’s siblings. The page has raised nearly $25,000.

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder arrived in Ferguson on Wednesday and promised a thorough investigation into the killing.

A grand jury has begun to probe the shooting, and is expected to conclude its investigation sometime in October.

Witness accounts of the Aug. 9 shooting have differed. Some say there was a scuffle between Brown and Wilson before the shooting. Others have said Brown was running away and then stopped and surrendered when he was killed.

An autopsy revealed Brown was shot six times.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO

sgoldstein@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!