FERGUSON, Mo. — Audio of police radio communications and video from surveillance cameras at the Ferguson Police Department offer new details from the day that Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, was shot dead by a white police officer in August.

As the region waits tensely for a grand jury to decide whether to indict the officer, Darren Wilson, in the shooting, the new disclosures gave yet another glimpse of the complicated and unusually abundant information that the jurors may be sifting through.

The audio and video were published on Friday by the St. Louis Post-Dispatch.

The police radio communications, including remarks by Officer Wilson, reveal that the encounter with Mr. Brown on Aug. 9 was brief — less than 90 seconds from start to finish. Though the time was short, questions remain about the encounter: Were Mr. Brown’s hands raised in the air in a motion of surrender when he was shot, as some witnesses have said? Was Officer Wilson punched and scratched in a struggle with Mr. Brown, as he has told the authorities? Did Officer Wilson view Mr. Brown as a suspect in a theft that had just occurred at a store?

The newly published audio, which the newspaper said it obtained through the state’s public records law, makes it clear that Officer Wilson was aware that other officers were investigating a “stealing in progress” that had been reported at a local market before he came across Mr. Brown and a friend on Canfield Drive. But the radio dispatches do not clarify whether Officer Wilson, who had initially warned the two friends not to walk in the street, suspected Mr. Brown at that point in connection with the theft.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Put me on Canfield with two,” Officer Wilson told a dispatcher at 12:02 p.m., moments before the shooting. “And send me another car.” Not long after the shooting, officials released video from the market, showing Mr. Brown pushing a store clerk and taking cigarillos a short time before his fatal confrontation with Officer Wilson.

The videotapes, according to the newspaper, came from later in the afternoon of Aug. 9 and show Officer Wilson walking out of the police department to go to the hospital and returning later. The video images do not reveal injuries on Officer Wilson, but they do not show his face clearly or close up.