Serious questions surround an Overland Park health professional who helped to conduct the autopsy on slain Ferguson, Missouri, teenager Michael Brown because he is not a licensed medical professional.

Shawn Parcells sat down with KMBC 9's Haley Harrison to address those questions.

Advertisement

Parcells holds a bachelor's degree in life sciences from Kansas State University and works as a forensic pathologist assistant. Nevada is currently the only state that requires licensing for that job.

"A pathologist assistant is considered a highly trained allied health professional," said Parcells.

He does not have a license or certification, but has taken part in some 1,500 autopsies. He said his credentials come from experience.

The American Association of Pathologist Assistants said pathologist assistants can perform all of the surgical and autopsy functions of a pathologist except making the diagnosis. He was hired by Michael Brown's family to assist noted pathologist Dr. Michael Baden in an independent autopsy after last month's police shooting.

"I was there to assist Dr. Baden," Parcells said. "That's it. That's all I did."

He said he had met Baden years earlier in a previous case.

Parcells has his own business where he performs autopsy work under a licensed physician. A doctor isn't always present for those procedures.

Parcells said that sometimes, with approval, he removes organs, takes photographs and notes and then turns over his report to a forensic pathologist who determines the cause of death.

"I've always worked with a qualified, licensed medical doctor who is a pathologist who, at the end of the day, calls the shots," Parcells said.

Some remain critical of Parcells, including Pettis County Coroner Robert "Skip" Smith.

"I've been to hundreds of autopsies," Smith said. "Does that makes me eligible to go in and do an autopsy myself?"

He said he hired Parcells' company five years ago because it was the most affordable, but he said Parcells overstepped his bounds.

"I felt like he was doing things that a doctor should have been doing, so I filed a complaint with the state board," Smith said.

KMBC 9 News found that a state investigation looked into the complaint, but nothing came of it.

About 40 Missouri coroners have ended contracts with Parcells. Saline County Coroner Willie Harlow said, "Shawn has taken a national tragedy and wrongly thrust himself into the middle of it."

Parcells said his critics envy his success.

"Especially after the Michael Brown thing happened, I reached out to four forensic pathologists that support me and they all said it's professional jealousy," he said. "End of story."

According to the AAPA, pathologist assistants can get specialized training and certification, but it's voluntary. Parcells said he wants to go through that process, not because he feels he's doing anything wrong, but to put an end to the questions.

Dr. Matthias Okoye, a forensic pathologist in Nebraska, there are many less-qualified than Parcells doing the same kinds of work.

Parcells still takes private cases and works with county coroners in Kansas and Nebraska.