Peaceful protesters face the police in Ferguson (Picture: AP Photo/St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen)

Anyone glued to Twitter right now is no doubt horrified by reports coming out of Ferguson, a suburb of St Louis, Missouri.

Demonstrations following the police shooting of unarmed black 18-year-old Michael Brown have escalated over four days as police crackdown with disproportionate violence.

Stories of police macing pregnant women and arresting reporters are rife. Rubber bullets and tear gas are being used, often against innocent civilians and non-violent protestors.

The case bears a remarkable similarity to the London riots of 2011 following the police shooting of Mark Duggan. Both raised serious questions about institutionalised racism in the police force.

But the behaviour of the police in Ferguson goes beyond race. Dehumanising treatment of citizens like that shames everyone, regardless of race, class or political leanings.

The role of the police is, broadly-speaking, to keep the peace, bring criminals to justice and support communities. The police force of Ferguson can’t be said to be doing any of these things.

Police in Ferguson (Picture: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters)

The London riots took the country by surprise a few years ago and the police force were caught short-handed and ill-prepared. Homes were burnt, livelihoods destroyed, and five people lost their lives.

Advertisement

Advertisement

While the riots were at their worst, people were calling for rubber bullets, tear gas and water cannons to be used against the rioters. Ferguson is a living example of why we should be immensely grateful that those tactics were never used during the UK riots.

Police instead relied upon riot shields and truncheons – weapons that keep the risk of injuring innocent bystanders as low as possible. Rubber bullets would have done nothing but damage relationships between communities and the police forces assigned to protect them.

The day after the riots ended, while the police were still out in force as a preventative measure, I saw something that made me very proud. A black woman took her young son to shyly say hello to a young white police officer in riot gear. The police officer crouched down to talk to the awe-struck child while the mother smiled proudly down at him.

I mention the race of the woman purely because the Mark Duggan case – not to mention various other cases of institutionalised racism – gave her every reason to be suspicious of the British police force. And yet here she was, introducing her child to a police officer as if he was a hero.

I can’t imagine that any child in Ferguson will ever look upon the police as heroes.

Peaceful protesters are getting caught up in the violence (Picture: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters)

I’m not saying that the British police force is perfect – far from it. But keeping a community in a state of fear is not the same as keeping the peace.

It shames the police force. It shames the citizens of Ferguson. It shames the whole system. It shames every human being on this planet who can’t understand that discrimination and lack of freedom damages all of us.