Ferguson police Chief Thomas Jackson in the days after the death of Michael Brown. (Getty Images/Scott Olson)

Police in Ferguson, Mo., have violated their own reporting standards since last month’s controversial fatal shooting of Michael Brown by Officer Darren Wilson.

Ferguson Police Department protocol requires that a use-of-force report be submitted after all such incidents — lethal, nonlethal and even when barehanded physical force is used.

A written directive signed by Chief Thomas Jackson in 2010 states “early and accurate reporting helps establish agency credibility.”

But there is no use-of-force report for the Aug. 9 shooting death of Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old who was shot multiple times in broad daylight in the middle of a residential street.

Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson and shooting victim Michael Brown. (Facebook/AP Photo) More

Yahoo News requested the report under Missouri’s public records laws. Ferguson City Clerk Megan Asikainen, who manages all municipal records, said multiple times that the document doesn’t exist.

The absence of the report also goes against the recommended standards of state and national police credentialing groups.

“Whenever the event occurs, the report then follows it,” said Sheldon Lineback, executive director of the Missouri Police Chiefs Association. “It should be done as soon as possible.”

The required reporting is spelled out in Ferguson’s 770-page General Orders, a manual used to meet accreditation standards and establish department procedures. In officer-involved shootings in which anyone is wounded, the order dictates that the top supervisor on duty submit a written form to commanders.

Emails and messages left for Chief Jackson were not returned.

James Ginger, a national expert on police practices and procedures, reviewed Ferguson’s use-of-force policy at Yahoo News’ request.

“I don’t see anything in the policy that excludes filling out the report for any reason,” Ginger said in a phone interview. “It’s a violation of established policy.”

This sort of transgression is likely to be unearthed by the U.S. Justice Department’s widespread probe of the predominantly white, 54-officer department. Ferguson officials have said they welcome the investigation, which will look for patterns of discrimination and review how officers use force, search and arrest suspects, and treat inmates at the municipal jail.

“They don’t miss stuff like this,” said Ginger, referring to unaccounted reports. “That’s something that Justice is going to pick up on.”

The absence of the use-of-force report or even an explanation of why one wasn’t filed is the latest example of Ferguson authorities withholding public information in the aftermath of the shooting of Brown, who was black, by Wilson, who is white.

From the start, Chief Jackson has been chided for waiting a week to identify Wilson. A basic police report on the fatal shooting was delayed 12 days. It was largely blank and omitted the “name of the victim and immediate facts,” which Missouri law considers to be public. Other Ferguson police reports related to Wilson have been released to Yahoo News with the names of arrested persons and other required details redacted, also a violation of state law.

Ferguson's general orders state that a report is required for all use of force incidents. Click image to read entire policy. More