Started support group because she read about Michael Brown's earlier robbery on a convenience store minutes before confrontation with Wilson

The woman who founded the movement to support Darren Wilson has spoken out and revealed that the Ferguson police officer could have a $1 million war chest.

The supporter said that she knew of at least $500,000 from two donation funds set up in his name but that was a 'conservative estimate' - and the total could be seven figures.

She declined to give her name for fear of reprisals and revealed that she had been subject to a torrent of 'vile' online abuse.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Support: The woman who founded the the movement to support officer Darren Wilson in the wake of the shooting of Michael Brown in August. She declined to be named for fear of reprisals

Ferguson cop Darren Wilson said that there would be a 'new normal' in his life after he shot dead Michael Brown in August but stood by his actions saying 'he was doing his job and feared for his life'

Secret wedding: On Monday morning, it was revealed that 28-year-old Wilson (left) - who hasn't been seen in public since the shooting - quietly married his fellow officer, Barbara Spradling (right), 37, last month. She has a child from an earlier relationship and they are now expecting their first child together

Rally: A group of Darren Wilson's supporters mount a show of unity in St Louis, Missouri, earlier this year

Wilson is still employed as a Ferguson police officer although his lawyers have said they are in the early stages of talks for him to leave the force.

He has not incurred huge legal fees as his lawyers were all from the police force union and the force is likely to have covered the cost of hiding him until the grand jury verdict was announced.

Wilson's war chest will probably be used to pay for additional security in the months and years ahead as he and wife Barbara Spradling, who has a child from a previous relationship and is pregnant with his baby, will be unable to work for some time and may have to relocate.

The supporter told MailOnline that she actually understood what it was like to lose a relative at the hands of police - as her own father was shot dead by a cop in 1995.

She said: 'You have to be accountable and my dad had to be accountable.

'He wasn't a bad person, Mike Brown might not have been a bad person but he made a very bad choice that day.

'My dad made a very bad choice back in 1995 and there are consequences to those actions, especially when you fight a police officer.'

After Wilson, who is white, shot dead unarmed black 18-year-old Michael Brown on August 9, there was an outpouring of support from his backers and law enforcement personnel around the world.

They sent in thousands of pictures of themselves with the caption 'I am Darren Wilson' and wore wristbands with his name on them.

In St Louis the supporter who started it all said that she 'jumped' to social media after hearing about the incident and held four rallies around the city.

During the first event in downtown St Louis she ironed a police shield onto dozens of T-shirts with the words: 'I stand by Darren Wilson' on them and sold them for $7.

Instead of a badge number it read 8.9.14, which is day he shot dead Brown.

Merchandise: Supporters have raised money for Wilson through t-shirts and hoodies. This one carries his name, says 'I stand by you' and instead of a badge number has 8.9.14 - referring to 9 August when he shot Michael Brown dead

Visible support: Wristbands backing the officer have also proved popular among the officer's backers

Web of backing: The group has turned to Facebook to make its voice heard

She said: 'My initial reaction was holy cow, was this one of those police officers who went crazy.

'And then that same police officer told me there was a strong arm robbery, then it disappeared but I already knew about that.

'Then some police officers that had the information, they told us what was really going on.

'We knew a lot of this evidence really early on. That instantly made me want to stand up and be a voice because if people saw me stand up and be a voice, and they knew that I knew things, that maybe they would too.'

She explained that Wilson's case struck a chord because her grandfather had been a St Louis County police officer and her father died at the hands of cops.

My dad attacked a police officer and my dad got shot and killed. My dad is to blame.

She said: 'My dad when I was 17 was shot and killed by police. My dad was Caucasian so it didn't make it past the nightly news.

'I know that people really want somebody to blame. At 17 years old I wanted somebody to blame, I wanted to blame the police at first. Then I wanted to blame myself, then I wanted to blame other people, I wanted to blame drugs.

'Then I realised quickly even at that young age; my dad is to blame. My dad attacked a police officer and my dad got shot and killed.

'I've been there, I've been where the Brown family is and I know that this is not the answer and I know that if it would have been a black police officer that day and white suspect, any other combination of factors, it wouldn't have made it past the nightly news.'

As support for Wilson grew, messages came in from around the world and many retired officers offered to let him come and stay at their place for free.

But there was a backlash and the supporter said that she received appalling online abuse.

Commenters threatened her family, said her 'head would look good with a bullet in it' and said they would rape her.

She had to completely change her Facebook profile and start a new one, though fortunately there have been no real-life incidents.

The supporter, who described herself as a 'very conservative Democrat' said she got 'really really vulgar death threats'.

She said: 'You name it, it was threatened.

Public: A public rally organized by supporters was held in St Louis in August. It accused the media of unfairly presenting the events of 9 August, when Michael Brown was shot and killed by officer Darren Wilson

Shooting: Michael Brown, 18, (left) was shot by Darren Wilson (right) on August 9 in Ferguson, Missouri

'We had protesters show up at our rallies. One woman came and jumped in at a bar and got in somebody's face but we were just nice.

'That's how we decided to deal with it, we're just going to be respectful.

'The second day some protesters came and it was 100 degrees and we brought them a bucket of water, we brought them hot dogs and they peacefully left.

'There's nothing to do if we're not going to give them a fight'.

The 'I support officer Wilson' Facebook page now has 87,000 likes and the 'Support Darren Wilson' community has 94,000 likes.

The supporter's new Facebook page: 'We are Darren Wilson', has nearly 8,000 likes.

On top of that a gofundme site was set up and received $235,000 in donations before being closed to new money.

Another by pro-police organization Shield of Hope has raised another $250,000.

The supporter said that she was 'not surprised' at the outpouring of support.

Asked if Wilson had $1 million from all contributions, she said: 'It's possible'.

Solemn: Six members of Michael Brown's family sit around the table in Ferguson on Thursday night and set out a seat for the slain teen at Thanksgiving dinner in a gesture of remembrance

Anger: Organizers

The supporter said she started the 'We are Darren Wilson' Facebook page in September to support law enforcement in general and not just him.

She said: 'We knew the aftermath (of Ferguson) was coming soon and we wanted to support them.'

In the coming months 'We are Darren Wilson' will change to 'Officer Needs Assistance St Louis' to reflect this.

The supporter will also be selling new wristbands which have 'I am Darren Wilson: St Louis strong' on the inside so they are not so circumspect.

One of their new projects is to help St Louis Police Wives and they have recently donated $4,500 to them to help as they deal with the unrest in Ferguson.

The supporter said: 'It's horrible. Some officers are single parents. They're leaving to go fight in this. None of them asked to be put out there whether they asked for it or not.

'Their kids are at home worrying about them, their wives are at home, their families. If they're a single parent it's really scary who is going to feed their kids when they're gone.

'The least we can do is try to feed them.'