Samples of oil taken from a sheen above the site of the sunken Deepwater Horizon oil rig and BP's Macondo 252 well matches oil released from the well during the 2010 spill, the U.S. Coast Guard announced late Wednesday. The Coast Guard has informed BP and Transocean, owner of the sunken Deepwater Horizon oil rig, that they may be held financially liable for the new oil.

View full size View full size

"The exact source of the sheen is uncertain at this time but could be residual oil associated with wreckage and/or debris left on the seabed from the Deepwater Horizon incident in 2010, said a news release issued by Coast Guard Capt. Duke Walker, who is the Federal On-Scene Coordinator for the spill.

There have been concerns since the sinking of the Deepwater Horizon that oil from the BP well could leak from storage areas on the ship or from the drilling riser piping that connected the well to the ship and now lies on the Gulf floor, a mile deep. Environmental groups also have raised concerns that the drilling of relief wells to cut off the flow of oil, or the failure of the original well, may have fractured the bottom sediments at the wellsite, which might eventually prove to be the site of new leakage from the well.

It's also unclear how much of the oil turned into droplets by the use of dispersants at the wellhead may have dropped to the bottom around the wellsite, another possible source of small amounts of oil floating to the surface.

The release said the Coast Guard has sent a Notice of Federal Interest to BP and Transocean.

"The NOFI effectively informs BP and Transocean that the Coast Guard matched the sheen samples to the Deepwater Horizon spill or sunken drilling debris, and that either party or both may be held accountable for any cost associated with further assessments or operations related to this sheen," said the news release.

The report comes the same day that the Wall Street Journal again reported that BP and the Justice Department are near a settlement in the federal lawsuit against BP and other responsible parties over the Deepwater Horizon spill. BP and other responsible parties, including Transocean, could be liable for between $5 billion and $21 billion in fines under the Clean Water Act related to the oil released from the BP well.

The sheen spotted at the well site was first reported to the Coast Guard's National Response Center on Sept. 16 by BP after the company identified what could be new oil at the site on satellite images taken during Sept. 9 and Sept. 14 overpasses of the Mississippi Canyon Block 52 area, the site of the well, which is about 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana.

"The sheen is not feasible to recover and does not pose a risk to the shoreline," the Coast Guard news release said.

The news release said the Coast Guard, with assistance from BP and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, has conducted regular assessments of the sheen by aircraft and boat since the discovery.

"The observed sheen size has varied over time depending on the conditions present," the release said. Samples were sent by the Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit in Morgan City on Sept. 26 to the Coast Guard's Marine Safety Lab in New London, Conn.

"The Gulf Coast Incident Management Team remains committed to the continued cleanup of the Gulf Coast and all shorelines affected as a result of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion," the news release said. "The FOSC (Federal On-Scene Coordinators) is determined to continue response activities to remove all oil where it is technologically feasible, environmentally beneficial and safe for workers to perform recovery operations."

Walker and the Coast Guard have been regularly criticized by Louisiana and parish officials over what they contend has been a reduction in efforts to identify and remove oil along the state's coastline.

"This new oiling at the well site contributes to Louisiana's concerns about the certainty of the ongoing oiling conditions and outstanding oil we have witnessed over the last several weeks," said Garret Graves, chairman of the state Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority and adviser to Gov. Bobby Jindal on the oil spill cleanup.

In the days following Hurricane Isaac, reports from several coastal locations indicated the storm's surge had uncovered mats of weathered oil on a number of beaches, including Elmer's Island and Grand Isle.

State officials have not yet agreed to a plan proposed by BP to "deep clean" the beaches, using mechanical sifting equipment, citing concerns about the method's effects on the environment.