HOLT: Good evening. I'm Lester Holt , in tonight for Brian Williams .

LESTER HOLT, anchor: Just hours before President Obama 's prime-time speech about the oil disaster this evening, there was a big setback in efforts to capture that oil. For several hours BP crews were forced to stop siphoning it from the site after a small fire on board the recovery ship. While the operation has now resumed, late today we learned the size of the leak may be much worse than we thought. A new government estimate puts the flow rate between 1 1/2 million to over 2 1/2 million gallons of oil a day. What we know for sure is that miles of gulf coastline, from Louisiana to Florida , have now been impacted by the oil. Our coverage tonight starts with NBC 's Tom Costello from Venice , Louisiana . Tom , good evening.

TOM COSTELLO reporting: Lester , good evening to you. And lightning strikes on oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico are not at all unusual because the rigs are the highest, tallest structures on the water. But today it appears that the most important vessel in this entire operation found itself a target. It was 9:30 in the gulf this morning when lightning struck the derrick on the Discoverer Enterprise collection ship. That started a fire on the same ship that's siphoning and collecting oil from BP 's broken pipe. No one was injured and the fire was quickly extinguished, but it temporarily shut down the limited siphoning operation now under way, meaning oil gushing from the well was again free flowing into the gulf. BP won't say how much oil was lost, but today new government estimates put the flow rate at up to 60,000 barrels, or 2 1/2 million gallons, a day. In Louisiana , it was yet another blow.

Mr. JOHN YOUNG (Jefferson County Councilman): It's a major setback. I mean, BP 's credibility is shot with these local town folk, with us. Everything that BP does we have to question, we have to verify.

COSTELLO: The delay comes after BP announced yesterday it hopes to increase the amount of oil it captures from 15,000 to 50,000 barrels a day by the end of June, two weeks earlier than planned. But on day 57 of this disaster, only a fraction of the leaking oil has been siphoned at the source or skimmed from the surface. This is called sargasso grass. It floats here in the Gulf of Mexico . A lot of bait fish like to hide in it to get away from predators. You can smell it. It's got an oily sheen to it. Normally this is a bright orange, but at the moment it's turned brown and black with oil.

Offscreen Voice #1: The oil actually is in ribbons.

COSTELLO: At the incident command center in Houma , Louisiana , giant projection screens tracked the oil flow and the ships on the ocean in real time. Today, 23 skimmers were on the leak site.

Captain ROGER LaFERRIERE (Coast Guard Incident Commander): Well, what's unique about this oil spill , different from any other, is that every day there's a new oil spill .

COSTELLO: BP is talking about increasing the containment capacity to 28,000 barrels a day by next week by -- to 50,000 barrels a day by the end of June, maybe 80,000 by mid-July. And, of course, Lester , it seems every week the estimates on how much oil is flowing go up. Back to you.

HOLT: Tom Costello in Venice tonight.