Surge from Tropical Storm Lee uncovered numerous tar mats, dozens of tar balls and abandoned strings of oil snare pom-poms along a stretch of Fourchon Beach owned by the Wisner Donation Trust, according to the property's manager. "The beach got hit hard by surge, as it always does," said Cathy Norman, secretary-treasurer and land manager for the trust. "With all the sand removed, many things were uncovered, including these huge tar mat areas.

"In some locations, the mats fell apart and tar balls blew up the beach and into the back marsh," Norman said. "The surge also uncovered oil snare and pieces of equipment that got buried during the BP oil spill response, including all these stakes that were used to hang the snare in the water to catch oil."

Norman said a BP representative was inspecting the beach on Wednesday, even as she and her staff were assessing the oil and equipment.

"We have teams conducting post-storm assessments along coastal beaches to determine what may have developed on the beaches and barrier islands as a result of Tropical Storm Lee," said BP spokesman Curtis Thomas. "As these teams report results of their assessments over the coming days, response teams will be mobilized as necessary to respond to these affected areas."

"If anyone has concerns regarding oil or tar balls on the beaches they should call the Response Center at 800.424.8802," he said in an e-mail.

BP contractors were scooping tar balls off Alabama Gulf Coast beaches on Wednesday after similar reports. The material will be tested to determine whether it is from the BP Macondo well that erupted in the Gulf of Mexico last year.

Coast Guard officials, who operate a Unified Incident Command office with BP in New Orleans to respond to BP oil cleanup issues, said there were no reports to its National Response Center of oil on Louisiana shorelines since Lee cleared out of the area on Tuesday.

Coast Guard spokeswoman Elizabeth Bordelon said Marine Safety Office officials in Morgan City and Houma also had no reports of tar balls or oil along Louisiana's coast.

Under the Wisner trust, which was donated in 1914 to the city of New Orleans under a 100-year agreement, the city receives 34.8 percent of the trust's revenue, Charity Hospital and the state of Louisiana receive 12 percent, and the rest goes to Tulane University, the Salvation Army and heirs of Edward Wisner. The city's revenue is distributed through its Wisner Fund as grants for health, beautification, education and capital projects.

Much of Port Fourchon, the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port's onshore operations, facilities owned by Chevron Oil and a number of other oil- and gas-production facilities all sit on Wisner land.

Norman also said Lee surge water retreating from interior wetlands cut new pathways through the beach. She blamed that on BP contractors' failure to remove barriers erected last year along existing passes to keep oil-stained Gulf waters from reaching the wetlands.

"They had built a huge land bridge and three sheet metal dams to close breaches and prevent oily water from moving inland," Norman said. "We asked when they installed them to remove them when they were no longer needed. When the storm came in, all of a sudden, we've got brand new breaches in areas where it never breached before.

"They've completely altered the hydrology along the beach," she said.

At several spots where contractors did use heavy equipment to dig out tar mats last year, the unconsolidated sand used to fill the holes has washed out and been lost to the beach, Norman said.

Norman said the uncovering of the new tar mats and tar balls should come as no surprise. The trust has been complaining to BP and Coast Guard officials for months about oil remaining just beneath the surface of the beach sand and just offshore.

"We've been responding all along to the ongoing contamination we've insisted has been there," she said. "We've done our own science on tar balls and residual oil we've found and turned it over to BP and the contractor down there that's in charge of cleanup."

But instead of increasing cleanup efforts, the work tapered off and became part of what BP and Coast Guard have labeled a program of monitoring and maintenance, she said.

"We have never been out of response mode. We've been out there without a pause, only slowed down a bit during nesting season this spring," Norman said. "We have never stopped seeing oil and they have never cleaned it up."

Mark Schleifstein can be reached at mschleifstein@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3327.



