The first of 98 rescued workers from the oil rig explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig arrived at a Kenner hotel Thursday shortly after 4:30 a.m., after a 100-plus mile boat journey from the burning rig to Port Fourchon Wednesday evening.

Initially rescue workers thought the workers would arrive in Fourchon on Wednesday at about 8 p.m., but the boat did not arrive until about 2 a.m. Family members throughout the day Wednesday had gathered at the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Kenner, where rig owner Transocean Ltd. had reserved blocks of rooms.

Private security guards with Blackhawk Protection blocked media access to the hotel early Thursday, and would not let reporters or photographers near the area where rig workers were getting off vans.

Within a half-hour of their arrival in Kenner, many workers and their families were already heading home.

Jim Ingram of Tylertown, Miss., waved off an optional medical examination after arriving in Kenner and hopped in the truck with his brother, Chris Laird, at about 5:15 a.m.

After more than 30 hours of travel from lifeboat to crewboat to police-escorted van, he said he's simply ready to see his family and get some rest.

"After I get to sleep, everything will be all right," Ingram said.

The scene he described on the rig was one of well-trained protocol in an unexpected disaster. Ingram was preparing for bed Tuesday night when all of a sudden everything went dark in his office.

"The lights went out; that's when the fun began," he said, wryly.

He described a large thud that "kind of sounded like a crane operator that would have landed a load." Then there was another.

"On the second one, we knew something was wrong," Ingram said.

Following the practice of weekly drills, an alarm sounded and he and others proceeded to the fiberglass lifeboats that were then lowered into the Gulf of Mexico. The lifeboats are equipped with diesel engines and employees are inside a hatch to protect themselves from fire hazards.

"The standards out there are extremely high, when it comes to safety," he said.

From there, Ingram said they traveled about 45 minutes to a supply boat that BP Exploration and Production Inc. had contracted to pick up survivors.

Beginning at first light this morning, a Coast Guard rescue helicopter and plane were back on the scene in the Gulf to continue the search for 11 missing crewmembers from the Deepwater Horizon rig.

Two Coast Guard cutters continued the search overnight. Overall, the Coast Guard has surveyed 1,940 square miles in a series of 17 separate air and sea search missions since the Tuesday explosion.