When a team of scientists from the National Wildlife Federation recently visited a marshy patch along the northern edge of Bay Jimmy in Plaquemines Parish, high winds forced them to beach their boat on the isle's protected side and walk across cordgrass to the Gulf-facing shoreline in search of oil. They didn't have to search long.



403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

The marsh edge "was dotted with asphaltene mats of dried oil," said David Muth, the federation's state director and former director of the Jean Lafitte National Historical Park. "And there was a dead white pelican, and there was oil on the bird's feathers."

When the television crew accompanying them reached the spot, National Audubon Society ornithologist Melanie Driscoll looked down and pointed at the photographer's shoes, Muth said.

"There was liquid oil bubbling around his shoes," he said.

Two years after the BP Deepwater Horizon disaster, oil can still be found staining as much as 200 miles of Louisiana's jagged coastline.

While the worst oiling remains at Bay Jimmy, other hot spots include the Middle Ground area of the Pass a Loutre Wildlife Management Area, where oil gets caught beneath wetland grasses; Elmer's Island and Fourchon Beach, where tar balls repeatedly wash up on the sand; and on barrier islands stretching from the northernmost part of the Chandeleur Island chain to the Isles Dernieres off Terrebonne Parish, where tar balls and some oil are found.

BP and Coast Guard officials contend the cleanup is winding down.

But state officials, including Gov. Bobby Jindal, complain that state and local governments have now been excluded from decisions on when to shut down the effort.

"Of the 635 miles of shoreline that required some measure of cleanup after the spill, only about four or five miles remain to be cleaned," said Curtis Thomas, a BP spokesman. "Louisiana marshes are environmentally diverse areas; this diversity requires cleanup decisions that take into account site-specific conditions."

In many cases, Thomas and cleanup officials said, the damage caused by additional cleaning outweighs the benefit of removing remaining oil.

Long-term monitoring

They also contend that the complex web of federal laws and regulations governing the oil spill limit what tasks can be performed as part of the "response" effort. Long-term monitoring does not fit into that task, they contend.

State officials, not unexpectedly, have a different view.

"We certainly support the concept of getting to a corporate endpoint -- we'd love for BP to leave -- but we want them to leave when things are done, and they're skipping that step," said Garret Graves, chairman of the state Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority and senior adviser to Jindal.

"Today in Louisiana, we still have over 200 miles of oiled shoreline," he said. "It's unbelievable that two years after the oil spill, we still have that degree of oiling. And we have BP and the Coast Guard trying to pull up stakes and get out of here, and that's frustrating."

Graves complained that the Coast Guard and BP are now dropping areas from the spill-response program over the state's objections. It's a complaint Graves has raised repeatedly since November, when the state refused to sign off on a Coast Guard-BP plan to transition from cleanup program to long-term recovery.

The state's complaints have not changed since then. BP and the Coast Guard, they say, have refused to include parish officials in decisions to declare oiled segments as cleaned, and they've refused to monitor for additional oiling that the state and local governments believe is occurring from material that lies just offshore and is pushed in by storms.

Cleanup agreements

Graves acknowledged there are some locations where digging up oil remaining beneath wetlands would cause more harm than good.

"But in locations where oil is easily accessible adjacent to the shoreline, that's not even a situation where you'd do a cost-benefit analysis," he said. "You remove the oil."

He blames the Coast Guard for agreeing to too many of BP's requests.

"The Coast Guard is not abiding by the agreements they signed with us, and the Coast Guard can't absolve or relieve BP of their statutory obligation to clean up the oil," he said. "We are very optimistic that, ultimately, the right decision will be made, and if it's not made by the Coast Guard, then it will be by the courts."

But Thomas said the cleanup teams are doing exactly what they should.

At the Middle Ground shoal area, for instance, the most heavily oiled location is about an acre. Officials used an analysis system approved by the Coast Guard to determine "that intensive manual and mechanical treatment could do more harm than good, and recommends allowing this marsh area to recover naturally," Thomas said.

In Louisiana, workers have so far removed nearly a million 42-gallon barrels of liquid waste, plus 48,128 tons of solid waste.

The Coast Guard refused to provide an officer to speak about the agency's role in the cleanup, instead arranging an interview with Gary Hayward, leader of the teams, that are overseeing the cleanup. Hayward, a geologist, works for Atlanta-based NewFields, an environmental services company, under a contract paid for by BP and approved by the Coast Guard. He is not related to former BP CEO Tony Hayward.

Hayward said that intense cleanups using heavy equipment and aggressive, sometimes damaging methods, are limited to about five miles of shoreline. But survey teams armed with shovels are still removing oil from more than 180 miles of coast.

One of the biggest complaints from the state and from officials like Plaquemines Parish President Billy Nungesser is the requirement that any additional oiling be reported to the Coast Guard's National Response Center, a call-in hotline, instead of to Hayward's teams. Nungesser said his staff has made dozens of such reports.

Hayward said he's aware of only one instance where such a complaint was forwarded to him, and it involved tar balls that showed up on Ship Island, part of the Gulf Islands National Seashore.

'It's spilt milk'

All sides agree that much of the oil has been removed from Louisiana shorelines, although the complex accounting system is at times daunting.

The so-called "SCAT" teams have surveyed 4,374 miles of coastline in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and Florida during the past two years, including at least 3,286 miles in Louisiana.

Included in the Louisiana total are 97 miles of coastline along the Chandeleur and Breton islands and the Delta National Wildlife Refuge at the mouth of the Mississippi River, which are owned by the U.S. Department of Interior.

Since the beginning of the spill, the team has identified 723 miles of Louisiana coast with oil, including the Interior properties. However, Hayward said, an oiled area that's only a few feet wide may result in an entire one-mile segment of shore being labeled oiled. The actual amount of oiling is often much smaller, he said.

There's still evidence of oil on 184 miles of state shoreline, and on the 97 miles of Interior shoreline in the state.

The surveys show only 327 miles of Mississippi, Alabama and Florida beaches were ever oiled, with oil still found on 90 miles. That does not include another 187 miles of Interior properties in those three states, where statistics for how much land was considered oiled were not available.

In most cases, the areas still considered oiled show evidence of light or very light oiling or tar balls, Hayward said.

Muth and other environmentalists are concerned about both the remaining oil and the damage caused by the removal methods.

"I think it's appropriate to continue the response on heavily utilized beaches like Grand Isle and Elmer's Island, but on remote beaches, the kinds of tar patties we've seen, you're doing more harm than good to go in and clean them up," he said. "And in those areas where they've discovered there's actually liquid oil down in the organic peat beneath the surface, I'm certain nothing could be done about that that doesn't also destroy the marsh you're trying to clean up."

"People have to understand there's no good ending here," Muth said. "You can't clean up an oil spill. It's spilt milk."

The argument over how much oil remains on the coastline also draws the public away from concern about whether a more significant amount of oil remains in deepwater areas offshore, especially along sensitive coral reefs, said Jacqueline Savitz, chief science officer for Oceana.

"There is no systematic study of the Gulf of Mexico to answer that question," she said. "But let's face it, there's a lot more oil out there."

The remains of the oil in deepwater may be in the form of droplets or material containing chemicals from the oil that has been excreted by microorganisms that have been credited with breaking down much of the oil and gas after the spill, Savitz said.

The big question, she said, is this: "Whatever it is, when it comes in contact with marine life, will it have effects?"

Mark Schleifstein can be reached at mschleifstein@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3327.



