Posted: Dec 9, 2010 3:51 PM by Katie Durio

Updated: Dec 9, 2010 3:51 PM

NEW ORLEANS - Today, the newly established Back to Work Coalition met in New Orleans to develop and discuss aggressive strategies to address the recent federal regulatory and policy issues affecting the oil and gas industry's efforts to resume operations in the federal waters of the Gulf of Mexico. The Back to Work Coalition is a working group established by Department of Natural Resources Secretary Scott A. Angelle under the direction of Governor Bobby Jindal. In November, Governor Jindal appointed Secretary Angelle the state's liaison for federal oil and gas permitting issues.



"The deepwater drilling moratorium may have been lifted, but the federal regulatory challenges continue to delay the return of new drilling in the Gulf," said Secretary Angelle. "By bringing together these trade associations and industry stakeholders, the Back to Work Coalition is a major step toward presenting a unified voice and finding solutions to those challenges."



"This coalition is not just about deepwater drilling or shallow water drilling, it's about organizing to do the tough work necessary to find a path forward," explained Secretary Angelle. "It's time to get the men and women of this industry back to work, as well as the other industries that are dependent upon drilling activity for survival - the welders, the boat captains, the pipefitters and caterers. There is a multitude of individuals on the coast who want to get back to work finding the fuel to energize America."



The Back to Work Coalition is comprised of interested stakeholders from oil and gas trade associations and industry stakeholders. The Gulf Economic Survival Team (GEST), a nonprofit organization that was founded for the purpose of restoring the economic health of the industries affected by the deepwater drilling moratorium, will serve as the facilitating organization for the Coalition.



"I agree with Secretary Angelle and believe that a unified front is our best opportunity to move the permitting process forward and address challenges that the industry has encountered with regard to the permitting process," said Don Briggs, Back to Work Coalition member and President of the Louisiana Oil & Gas Association (LOGA).



"The Back to Work Coalition is an innovative partnership that is absolutely necessary for making headway in the federal permitting process," said Jim Noe, Back to Work Coalition member and Senior Vice President and General Counsel for Hercules Offshore. "It represents the best opportunity for us to band together and see real results."



Today's inaugural Coalition meeting was preceded by a meeting yesterday between Director Michael Bromwich of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) and Secretary Angelle in Houma.



"I characterize yesterday's meeting with Director Bromwich as productive, but I made it clear that we will continue to press for a resolution of obstacles. Director Bromwich did make the commitment to me that no new rules or regulations would be issued unless through an investigation it is determined that the failure to issue a new rule would be irresponsible," said Secretary Angelle. "The ideas exchanged at today's Coalition meeting exhibited to me the commitment that the industry and trade associations have to solving this issue."



The Back to Work Coalition also recognized Governor Jindal for his dedication and leadership to finding solutions to the offshore issues that affect the livelihood of many Louisianians.



The Back to Work Coalition Leadership Advisory Committee includes: GEST, Louisiana Oil & Gas Association (LOGA), Louisianan Mid-Continental Oil and Gas Association (LMOGA), American Petroleum Institute (API), National Ocean Industries Association (NOIA), International Association of Drilling Contractors (IADC), Offshore Marine Service Association (OMSA), Offshore Operators Committee (OOC), Independent Petroleum Association of America (IPAA), Greater New Orleans, Inc (GNO, Inc), U.S. Oil and Gas Association and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Participating members of the Louisiana Congressional Delegation include: Senator Mary Landrieu, Senator David Vitter, Congressman Charles Boustany, Congressman Steve Scalise, Congressman Bill Cassidy and Congressman-elect Jeff Landry.

