BP announced Thursday that it has sealed a 40-foot-tall, 86-ton steel containment dome that has been leaking oil below the surface of the Gulf of Mexico, causing repeated sheens near the site of the disasterous BP oil spill in 2010.

The dome, also called a cofferdam, was used in the early stages of the response and trapped oil and slushy methane hydrates from a leaking drill pipe in an attempt to funnel it to the surface.

Representatives of the Coast Guard and the Interior Department's Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement and Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, which regulate offshore drilling, monitored the cap and plug operation -- which began Tuesday -- via a video feed in New Orleans, as did representatives of Louisiana, Mississippi and Florida, according to a Coast Guard news release. However, Coast Guard Capt. Duke Walker, the federal on-scene coordinator for the Deepwater Horizon spill, did not announce publicly that he had approved BP's capping plan until the containment dome was sealed.

The company deployed Remotely Operated Vehicles -- small, unmanned submarines -- to install a 750-pound cap over an opening called a stovepipe, securing it with clamps. The ROVs also inserted plugs into four small connection ports on the top and side of the containment dome. The operation took 26 hours to complete.

"Initial visual inspections of the cap and plugs have observed no oil droplets emanating from any of the openings," said BP's announcement. The company will continue to monitor the sheen through satellite images "for several days to confirm that the cap and plugs are secure."

Last week, the company used ROVs to survey the Macondo well and two relief wells drilled to stop the leak, then issued a statement saying they were not leaking.

"It marked the third time since the Macondo well was permanently sealed in September 2010 that well integrity was confirmed by visual inspection," the BP statement said.

That latest inspection followed Walker issuing a "notice of federal interest" to BP and Transocean, owner of the sunken Deepwater Horizon drilling rig, that they were responsible for halting the source of the sheen, after tests found the sheen matched oil from the BP well.

Walker has since issued a new directive to BP to submit a feasibility plan that considers the next steps toward either removing or remediating the threats of oil posed by the riser pipe and containment dome, the release said.

BP reported the most recent sheen to the Coast Guard's National Response Center on Sept. 16, after it was observed on satellite images.

The company originally focused on the riser as the source of the oil, after its tests of the sheen indicated the presence of alpha-olefins, a compound found in drilling mud that would have been in the pipe used to pump fluids into the well as it was being drilled.

Tests run by the Coast Guard's Marine Safety Laboratory in New London, Conn., found three samples of the sheen "to be representative of spilled oil," according to the lab's report, which was released to the The Times-Picayune in response to a federal Freedom of Information Act request.

Two of the samples exhibited traits indicating the oil they contained "did not surface during the original Deepwater Horizon incident," the report said. A third sample didn't contain enough oil for comparison purposes.

The Coast Guard also released a copy of the two-page letter containing the joint BP-Transocean plan for identifying the source of the sheen. The plan consisted of two paragraphs that called for BP to acquire satellite data of the sheen area and for BP and Transocean to survey the main Macondo well and two relief wells, the riser and the containment dome with ROVs. It also provided the federal agencies the opportunity to either accompany the survey team or view the work in New Orleans or Houston.

Also released was a copy of Walker's original Notice of Federal Interest, which warned the two companies that the failure to remove the oil represented by the sheen could result in a civil penalty of $40,000 per day, and that the companies could be billed three times the cost of any cleanup that would have to be paid for by the federal Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.

But as long as Walker determined the two companies were taking adequate actions, the federal government's role "will usually be limited to monitoring the progress of the actions and providing guidance as necessary," the notice said.