The federal judge overseeing the massive Gulf oil spill litigation on Friday gave final approval to BP's medical settlement for cleanup workers and others who say they got sick from exposure to oil or dispersants in the wake of the accident.

The settlement, approved by U.S. District Judge Carl Barbier, resolves claims with residents of beachfront and wetland areas who were made sick by the spill, and those injured or made ill as a result of cleanup work. Both groups now become eligible for payments for specific ailments.

The settlement class includes those who developed one or more specified physical conditions when they served as cleanup workers between April 2010, and April 16, 2012, or lived for at least 60 days near the areas impacted by the spill.

The settlement excludes anyone who worked for BP over a nearly two-year stretch after the spill, as well as those who opted out of the settlement class or released their claims in exchange for a payout from the Gulf Coast Claims Facility.

In a statement, BP spokesman Geoff Morrell said the approved medical and economic and property damage settlements were "good for the people, businesses, and communities of the Gulf and are in the best interest of BP's stakeholders."

"These settlements are historic resolutions that avoid years of lengthy litigation, and today's decision by the court represents yet another critical step forward for BP in meeting its commitment to economic and environmental restoration efforts in the Gulf and in eliminating legal risk facing the company," Morrell said.

Last month, Barbier approved a separate aspect of the settlement that resolved economic and property claims resulting from the British oil giant's Macondo well blowout, which killed 11 workers aboard the Deepwater Horizon oil rig and caused one of the worst environmental disasters in U.S. history.

The settlement aims to resolve more than 100,000 claims, which BP estimates could cost about $7.8 billion or more. However, there is no limit to payouts under the medical settlement, which also includes provisions for individuals to file for benefits in the future, if they are able to show their illnesses were caused by the spill.

On Friday, plaintiffs' attorneys Steve Herman and Jim Roy said they were "extremely pleased" with the ruling.

"Clean-up workers, coastal residents and the Gulf Coast region at-large will benefit greatly from the myriad programs offered by the Medical Benefits Settlement" the attorneys said in a statement. "Those most directly affected by the Deepwater Horizon tragedy will get the immediate relief they need; those who may later become sick will have the opportunity to be diagnosed early, and; the region's healthcare infrastructure will be made stronger for years to come."



View the latest Gulf of Mexico oil spill photos here





