BP has used almost 600,000 gallons of the oil dispersant Corexit at the surface of the Gulf of Mexico to break-up the slick from the Deepwater Horizon spill , but concerns are growing about the environmental impact of those chemicals on the Gulf ecosystems and human residents of the area.

Federal officials have expressed the need for more toxicology studies on the dispersants, and whether dispersed oil is any less of a threat than non-dispersed oil. One toxicology expert, Dr. William Sawyer, called the products "deodorized kerosene," and a group of Louisiana fisherman and marine toxicologist Riki Ott are asking President Barack Obama to order BP to stop using the compound.

Most experts won't go that far, but even EPA administrator Lisa Jackson and NOAA administrator Dr. Jane Lubchenco admitted in a recent conference call that the effects of the dispersants are largely unknown. Most of the studies performed on the agents have been testing effectiveness on dispersing oil, not on toxicity.

"There are a diversity of types of habitats in the Gulf," Lubchenco said. "Many of them are very important in support of a variety of wildlife and fisheries. At this point many of them are at risk of being affected but we don’t have any direct way to know exactly which ones or in what amount."

Over the weekend, the Environmental Protection Agency gave the go-ahead to begin using the dispersants at depth to break up the oil, another largely untested process.



The exact chemical composition of the dispersants being used is not public information, but the products are called Corexit 9527 and Corexit 9500. Corexit 9527 was used in the cleanup of the Exxon Valdez spill, and contains 2-butoxyethanol, a chemical solvent that is used in paint thinners and varnish removers, among other products.

The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, a branch of the CDC, describes 2-butoxyethanol as a toxic compound with a host of negative effects on humans, including kidney and liver damage at high doses. The data material safety sheets for both Corexit 9527 and Corexit 9500 advise "Do not contaminate surface water," under the heading "Environmental Precautions."



Corexit 9500 is a newer formula that does not include 2-butoxyethanol. Jackson said the EPA had approved both Corexit products for use, and did not know how much of the total 582,416 gallons used was 9527 and how much was 9500.

There is also concern that Corexit may not be the best choice to break up Louisiana crude. Greenwire's Paul Quinlan reported that 12 EPA-approved dispersants were more effective on southern Louisiana crude, and some of those were less toxic than the Corexit products.

Quinlan also reports that Nalco, the company that makes Corexit, "boasts oil-industry insiders on its board of directors and among its executives, including an 11-year board member at BP and a top Exxon executive."



