A pair of deepwater relief wells still represent the best chance of stopping the leaking oil well in the Gulf of Mexico

The relief wells are essentially copies of the well that caught fire and killed 11 men on April 20, starting the Gulf oil disaster.

Instead of drilling for oil, workers are targeting the 7-inch-wide steel-casing pipe located just above the spot where the well enters the oil reservoir 18,000 feet deep.

"The long-term solution is going to be drilling the relief wells," said Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen, in a recent briefing, noting an early August estimate for their completion. While containment chambers and "top kill" and "junk kill" attempts at the well's failed blowout preventer have made headlines, the relief wells have quietly continued. If all goes as planned, the wells will intersect the leak hole, far beneath any leaking fractures of the casing pipe and the faulty blowout preventer, then pour mud and cement inside to seal it forever.

LIVE CHAT WEDNESDAY: USA TODAY's Brian Winter talks about the Gulf oil spill

"It is very doable and not as needle-in-the-haystack as portrayed," says petroleum engineer Jack Evers of the University of Wyoming in Laramie. The oil industry has relied upon relief wells since the 1920s to stop well blowouts. Relief wells were part of BP's response plan filed last year with the federal government:

• Relief well 1, started May 2, has drilled to a depth of 13,978 feet. The well has advanced more than 1,000 feet in the past week.

• Relief well 2, started May 16, has halted at 8,576 feet down, while BP engineers double-check its blowout preventer. A June 10 statement says it is "preparing to drill ahead."

BP did not reply to a June 10 request from USA TODAY to explain the nature of the second relief well's blowout preventer problems, or to a request for the plan of the wells, beyond a general schematic on the BP's emergency response website.

"My expectation is that it is possible to eventually successfully control and plug the blowout," says petroleum engineer John Smith of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, by e-mail. "No action or operation ... has 100% probability of success. That relates to why BP is drilling two wells."

The wells proceed nearly straight down to about a depth of 10,000 feet. They then turn, guided by gyroscopes and magnetic sensors, drilling to within about a hundred feet of the leaking casing. From there, sensors detecting the lowered electrical resistance caused by the steel in the well help guide the drill. "So the target isn't really a few inches, but tens of feet," Evers says. "Once it has been located, the intersect wellbore can be guided toward the runaway well." The first relief well has already started this turn.

Oil well pipes are surrounded by casings of increasingly slim width, extended like an antenna deep into the ground and cemented in place. If the first well has trouble reaching the 7-inch casing at the foot of the well, an alternative is to aim for the 10-inch casing about 15,000 to 17,000 feet down.

Similar relief wells stopped Mexico's 1979-80 Ixtoc oil spill, the largest accidental leak in history, which ran for 290 days. If the ongoing relief wells stop the BP leak in early August as planned, it will have occurred after about 100 days of spewing crude into the Gulf of Mexico.