U. Rashid Sumaila,a Andrés M. Cisneros-Montemayor,a Andrew Dyck,a Ling Huang,a* William Cheung,b† Jennifer Jacquet,a Kristin Kleisner,a Vicky Lam,a Ashley McCrea-Strub,a Wilf Swartz,a Reg Watson,a Dirk Zeller,a Daniel Paulya

aFisheries Centre, The University of British Columbia, 2202 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.

bSchool of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, United Kingdom.



Paper handled by associate editor Terrance Quinn III

Received November 24, 2010. Accepted October 7, 2011.

Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 2012, 69(3): 499-510, https://doi.org/10.1139/f2011-171

Marine oil spills usually harm organisms at two interfaces: near the water surface and on shore. However, because of the depth of the April 2010 Deepwater Horizon well blowout, deeper parts of the Gulf of Mexico are likely impacted. We estimate the potential negative economic effects of this blowout and oil spill on commercial and recreational fishing, as well as mariculture (marine aquaculture) in the US Gulf area, by computing potential losses throughout the fish value chain. We find that the spill could, in the next 7 years, result in (midpoint) present value losses of total revenues, total profits, wages, and economic impact of US$3.7, US$1.9, US$1.2, and US$8.7 billion, respectively. Commercial and recreational fisheries would likely suffer the most losses, with a respective estimated US$1.6 and US$1.9 billion of total revenue losses, US$0.8 and US$1.1 billion in total profit losses, and US$4.9 and US$3.5 billion of total economic losses.

In this paper Top of page Introduction « Materials and methods Results Discussion References Appendix A. More on input–output models

Introduction

On 20 April 2010, the Deepwater Horizon (DH), an oil rig leased by British Petroleum (BP), exploded in the Gulf of Mexico (GOM) and began leaking oil from the seabed at a depth of over 1500 m. On Monday, 1 August 2010, the US government stated that BP’s ruptured well had gushed an estimated 4.9 million barrels of oil (780 million L), making it the largest accidental marine oil spill in US waters (Levy and Gopalakrishnan 2010; Urriza and Duran 2010). In contrast, the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill, a major disaster in US history, amounted to less than 0.5 million barrels (80 million L). Given the likely economic and legal repercussions of this major pollution event, a rapid first-order estimation of the likely economic losses due to the oil leaks is required. Here, we present such a preliminary estimate using a top-down approach to set a baseline for future, hopefully more detailed, comprehensive economic assessments.

Besides obvious environmental effects, oil spills can have extensive socio-economic, psychological, and even cultural impacts, including effects on marine resource use and livelihoods (e.g., fisheries) and public health (Anonymous 1989; 1990a; Palinkas et al. 1993). Impacts on marine ecosystems can persist for extended periods and stem directly from the destruction of habitats, death and pollution of plants and animals, and changes to food web structure and function. For example, the environmental and economic effects of the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill in Prince William Sound, Alaska, were still being felt in the early 2000s (Graham 2003). The impacts on marine ecosystems translate into impacts on the economy and livelihoods, including commercial fisheries, recreation, mariculture (marine aquaculture), tourism, and energy markets. Fish caught from contaminated areas or neighboring locations will raise concerns about food safety. These effects call for actions to mitigate, recover, and prevent the incidence of oil spills, which are costly to society.

The coast of the GOM is made up largely of saltwater marshes, mangroves, wetlands, and estuaries, which are important nursery and foraging areas for many marine species. Within these ecosystems, there are over 15 000 species of fauna and flora (Felder and Camp 2009), including whales, turtles, manatees, sharks and other fishes, shrimps, crabs, mollusks, birds, seagrasses, and mangroves. Many of these species are highly valued by commercial and recreational fisheries, including brown shrimp ( Farfantepenaeus aztecus ), blue crab ( Callinectes sapidus ), eastern oyster ( Crassostrea virginica ), red snapper ( Lutjanus campechanus ), Gulf menhaden ( Brevoortia patronus ), and bluefin tuna ( Thunnus thynnus ). Additionally, one of only two existing Atlantic bluefin tuna spawning grounds is located in the GOM. Large-scale pollution events, such as the DH spill, can result in impacts that are both direct (e.g., acute-phase mortality) and indirect (e.g., bioaccumulation through the food web). Indirect effects have been shown to persist for decades (Graham 2003).

Long-term studies on salt marsh habitat following the Florida barge spill in Wild Harbor, Massachusetts, USA, in 1969 demonstrate the persistence and impacts of oil within sediments (Culbertson et al. 2007, 2008a, 2008b). Buried hydrocarbons result in the destruction of seagrass root structure and subsequent losses of grass cover and increased erosion even 40 years later (Culbertson et al. 2008a).

Within tropical ecosystems, mangroves are considered to be among the most susceptible to impacts from oil spills (Shigenaka 2002). Studies of mangrove habitats after the 1986 spill of 50 000 barrels from the Galeta near the Panama Canal demonstrate the influence of sediments acting as long-term reservoirs of oil (Burns et al. 1993). The persistence of the oil was unexpected because of relatively warm tropical waters, which were thought to increase the rate of breakdown of the hydrocarbons. Short-term effects included dead mangroves along 27 km of coastline even 1½ years after the spill (Jackson et al. 1989) and the deterioration of surviving mangroves up to 6 years after the spill (Burns et al. 1993). Long-term effects were not only apparent in the mangroves themselves, but also detected in the species found associated with the root structure (i.e., bivalves).

Coral reefs are one of the most diverse marine ecosystems and host highly complex communities (Haapkyla et al. 2007). Besides obvious lethal effects of oil, sublethal effects such as reduced reproductive efficiency have also been demonstrated (Loya and Rinkevich 1980). Haapkyla et al. (2007) reviewed the impacts of oil and oil spills on corals and found that corals were negatively impacted, leading to decreases in coral cover, growth, reproductive output, and species diversity. Only in two cases were no or only minor effects found, these being the Arabian Gulf field experiment in 1989 (LeGore et al. 1989) and oil spills in the Arabian Gulf related to the Gulf War in 1991 (Downing and Roberts 1993; Price 1998).

Unlike the visually obvious and immediate effects on birds and mammals, the effects of oil on fisheries can be more difficult to detect, though they are no less devastating. Oil spreads through the marine ecosystem and damages coastal areas important as nurseries for juvenile fish and shrimp. Oil and hydrocarbons are taken up by plankton and other surface-dwelling species that link to aquatic food chains. Thus, oil moves through the food web and accumulates in food fishes, posing serious health concerns for consumers. Almost immediately following the DH spill, the region’s key shrimp and oyster fishing areas were officially closed. According to the US National Marine Fisheries Service, 70% of the commercially caught shrimp and oysters in the US come from the GOM (National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration 2010).

Several studies have examined the effects of oil on fish and invertebrate species. The Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989 had notable effects on important fish species, such as Pacific herring ( Clupea pallasii ) and pink salmon ( Oncorhynchus gorbuscha ), including premature hatching, reduced growth rates, morphological and genetic abnormalities, and increased mortality (Bue et al. 1998; Rice et al. 2001). Adult Pacific herring showed evidence of liver lesions and increased disease due to depressed immune function (Moles et al. 1993; Carls et al. 2001). These effects contributed to increased natural mortality in adult Pacific herring over a 5-year period (Thorne and Thomas 2007). Research on biomarkers of hydrocarbon exposure in nine species of pelagic and demersal fish showed that 10 years after the Exxon Valdez spill, signs of exposure were still present (Jewett et al. 2002). Consequences have been shown to be more severe for invertebrates because of their sessile nature and close association with contaminated habitats, including declines in abundance, growth rate, and condition (Culbertson et al. 2007, 2008a). Sediments and intertidal mussel beds ( Mytilus trossulus ) showed evidence of contamination 6 years after the Exxon Valdez oil spill and were a source of chronic contamination for predatory species (Carls et al. 2001).

In addition to direct effects on individual species, food web interactions allow for the propagation of negative impacts to higher trophic levels. The impact of the Tsesis oil spill on benthic organisms in the Baltic Sea in 1977 resulted in food chain transfer of oil to flounder ( Platichthys flesus ; Elmgren et al. 1983).

The magnitude and duration of impacts will depend on the scale of the spill, the type of hydrocarbon, and the characteristics of the marine environment. Benthic and relatively sessile organisms (e.g., crabs, clams, mussels, and shrimps) suffer high initial mortalities, displacement, or contamination (becoming unmarketable) of up to 100% (Teal and Howarth 1984). Mobile fish species are generally subject to lower initial mortality rates, although those can quickly rise in large spills. For example, the 1979 Ixtoc I blowout, previously the largest accidental oil spill in history, is estimated to have caused 50%–70% fish mortality in adjacent coastal regions (Jernelov and Linden 1981).

There are many studies that examine the initial impacts of oil spills on species, yet few consider the time scale for marine organisms to recover from exposure. Recovery time is dependent on the length of exposure, water temperature, oceanographic features of the region, mobility, and ontogenetic stage of the species, as well as species-specific life history traits (e.g., feeding and reproductive patterns). The ability of critical habitats to act as long-term reservoirs of oil can extend exposure and subsequent recovery times. While habitat recolonization can begin within 3 to 6 months, it generally takes at least 1 year for pollutant concentrations in marine organisms to return to prespill conditions (Teal and Howarth 1984). This assumes that the spill has ended and most oil cleaned up, so the minimum duration of impacts can be well over 1 year. In fact, oil concentrations in sediment, where it is most persistent, have been detected up to 40 years after a spill (Culbertson et al. 2008a). All of these effects depend to a great extent on the type of ecosystem affected. In tropical systems like the GOM, impacts can be exacerbated by a high proportion of mangroves and marshes, which capture and retain oil for prolonged periods, affecting organisms that depend on these habitats for food, reproduction, and shelter (Jackson et al. 1989).

There are numerous economic assessments of oil spills, which can be adapted for the current assessment. Cohen (1995) estimated the social costs (i.e., cost to society as opposed to private cost to a firm or an individual) of the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill for the years 1990 and 1991 by examining the revenue difference between actual fisheries catches with and without the spill. García-Negro et al. (2009) studied the economic impact of the 2002 Prestige oil spill on the affected coastline in Spain, investigating the fisheries landings before and after the accident. The McDowe Group used business surveys to determine the economic effect of the Exxon Valdez spill on Alaska’s tourism industry (Anonymous 1990b). A study by Advanced Resources International provided estimates of economic impacts for many oil spill accidents by dividing spills into three types: tanker, pipeline, and offshore platform, and determined the cost for clean-up, oil losses, environmental and resource damage per gallon (1 gallon = 3.785 L) of oil spilled to be US$260, US$1.71 and US$9.91–19.81, respectively (Anonymous 1993). Clean-up costs and environmental damage from tanker spills are highly variable, but can be particularly high if the spill occurs in remote and environmentally sensitive areas, as has occurred in the past. Offshore facilities have a relatively good safety record, so spill effects are more poorly defined. However, large blowouts close to sensitive coastal areas such as marshland or reefs can lead to substantial ecological and economic damages (e.g., Ixtoc I, 1979; Union Platform A, 1969); the DH blowout is unfortunately one such case.

An important consideration in this study is the potential market recovery times (i.e., the time required for market conditions for the affected fish species to return to prespill levels) of commercially important species in the GOM. There is a distinct difference between ecological and market recovery times. As mentioned above, ecological recovery can take decades, especially for organisms associated with sediments such as crustaceans and mollusks. Market recovery time, on the other hand, depends on the length of fisheries closures after a spill, public perceptions of seafood safety, and the degree of tainting (both visible and with respect to taste and smell of seafood; Moller et al. 1999).

The oil industry typically touts the quick recovery of organisms to an “untainted state” as evidence of the safety of seafood after an oil spill (e.g., Moller et al. 1999). However, after the Exxon Valdez spill, fisheries for salmon, herring, crab, shrimp, rockfish, and sablefish were closed, with some commercial fisheries remaining closed through 1990. Herring and salmon species in the region have never fully recovered ecologically or economically. One of the main reasons for this is the public perception of contamination from seafood (see http://useconomy.about.com/od/suppl1/p/Exxon_Valdez_ Oil_Spill_Economic_Impact.htm).