Latest Conference News Summary information for the 2016 Conference is now available! Watch the opening plenary , "Big Open Data: Enhancing Science and Decision-making for the Gulf of Mexico," featuring the keynote address by Dr. Marcia McNutt and an expert panel discussion.

, "Big Open Data: Enhancing Science and Decision-making for the Gulf of Mexico," featuring the keynote address by Dr. Marcia McNutt and an expert panel discussion. Scan through archived oral and poster abstracts.

and abstracts. Download the Conference Report , which provides an overview of conference goals and plenaries, session summaries, and a synthesis of key messages, based on the latest Gulf scientific findings and research gaps and challenges identified during sessions.

ePosters are available to conference registrants; to access the ePosters site you will need your registration confirmation number and the email address you used for registration. (If you don't know your confirmation number, there's a link to help jog your memory.) Once you've entered this information, click on the ePosters tab on top of the page and then follow the link provided. Registration Information Important Dates

Registration is now open. Online registration closes January 22, 2016. Onsite registration will be available at the conference. Registration Fees

Registration: $500

Student registration: $150

One-day registration: $250 We accept payment by credit card, PayPal and check. Credit card payments are processed through PayPal but you do not need a PayPal account. If you are paying by check, please make it out to "Gulf of Mexico Alliance" and mail to:

Gulf of Mexico Alliance

1151 Robinson Street

Ocean Springs, MS 39564 Refunds

If a registration is cancelled on or before November 20, 2015, a full refund will be issued, minus a small processing fee based on payment type. After November 20, no refunds will be made. Register Now!

Online Program

Mobile App

ePosters

Student Information Theme and Objectives The 2016 conference theme, “One Gulf: healthy ecosystems, healthy communities,” will focus on opportunities to promote and sustain a healthy Gulf environment, communities, and economy, including new discoveries, innovations, technologies, and policies. A strong emphasis this year will be placed on the human dimensions of oil spill in addition to the ecosystem science research that has led past conferences. The scientific program of the 2016 conference will invite Sessions, talks and posters on the following objectives: Understand the dynamic physical processes of the Gulf of Mexico and related environment.

Understand the chemistry of the Gulf of Mexico system and the evolution, degradation, and interactions of pollutants introduced in coastal, open-ocean, and deep-water ecosystems.

Understand the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem and its resilience, including the sea floor, water column, coastal waters, beach sediments, wetlands, marshes, and organisms.

Advance technology developments for improved research, observation, and operations in the Gulf.

Apply data management and informatics in the context of Gulf of Mexico ecosystem science and oil spill response, restoration and policy.

Understand the impacts of oil spills on public health, socio-economics, and ecosystem services. Understand linkages between the health of people, animals, and Gulf and associated management and policy decision-making.

Understand the human dimensions of response, mitigation, and restoration following environmental emergencies.

Improve education, outreach, and other efforts to communicate with the public about the risks and long-term impacts of oil spill incidents, and the recovery, and restoration of the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem. Sponsors Partners and Supporters We're social! Stay informed of conference updates by following us on Twitter (#gulfscienceconference #OneGulf) and liking us on Facebook. Past and Future Conferences Upcoming: 2017 Conference - New Orleans, LA

Venue: Hyatt New Orleans

February 6-9, 2017 2018 Conference - New Orleans, LA

Venue: Hyatt New Orleans

February 5-8, 2018 2019 Conference - New Orleans, LA

Venue: Hyatt New Orleans

February 4-7, 2019 Archives: 2015 Conference 2014 Conference 2013 Conference Details