Print Share + Protest Held Near BP Gas Station In Bloomington

BLOOMINGTON, Minn. (WCCO) ―

The gulf oil spill has some people calling for a boycott of British Petroleum.Monday, protesters carried signs across the street from a BP gas station in Bloomington."It's more of a message for the owner. He should boycott BP. And I guess the message for everyone else is they should also boycott any company that is selling those products. So the message to this guy is he should be selling biofuels," said protester Kevin Palmer."For symbolic reason it would be good to stay away from BP. But I think the best thing to do is focus on other types of energy," said Marianna, another protester.The owner of the Bloomington station, who also owns other BP stations, said he has not seen a drop in business since the oil spill.He said some drivers made a point to buy his gas when they saw the protesters.Most BP stations in Minnesota have local owners but they buy gas from BP.More than 235,000 people have become fans of the "Boycott BP" page on Facebook "Has anyone made stickers to put on our CARS? I drive past BP stations here in Atlanta and cannot believe people are still buying gas from them," wrote Tiffany.Dr. Akshay Rao is from the Carlson School of Management. WCCO-TV asked him if a boycott could really cause BP stations to close."I highly doubt it. Unless it is an international boycott of massive proportions that lasts a long time, it's unlikely to," said Dr. Akshay Rao.Protest organizers were not calling for a boycott of Minnesota stations. Their message is that the BP Corporation must pay for the disaster, not taxpayers."There's some doubt about that right now, with the idea, talking about a cap for liability for them. So we're out here trying to say 'Make BP pay for this,'" said protester Sarah Combellick-Bidney."BP has the ultimate responsibility because they knew what potentially dire consequences could come from making a mistake and not doing their jobs properly. The idea that they would foist that cost on the American public is really outrageous to me," said another protester, Jeremy Cooper.Several other BP gas stations also told WCCO they have not seen a drop in business since the oil spill.

(© MMX, CBS Broadcasting Inc. All Rights Reserved.)