The end is in sight for the civil trial of BP and its partners in the ill-fated Macondo oil and gas exploration well, but not before the British oil giant has its day in court.

Seven weeks in, BP will begin presenting its defense Monday (April 8) in the sprawling Gulf of Mexico oil spill trial, which will determine liability and fines potentially worth tens of billions of dollars in the 2010 fire and explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig that killed 11 workers and soiled beaches and marshes from Louisiana to Florida.

BP lawyer Robert "Mike" Brock told U.S. District Judge Carl Barbier Jr. on Wednesday that he believes the company will finish presenting its case by April 23. Its first witnesses are set to include two experts in drilling and well design, and Steve Robinson, a BP vice president who helped lead the company's internal investigation into the disaster.



Although initial testimony has offered few surprises, with much of what went wrong on April 20, 2010 already pieced together by federal investigators and internal reviews, one legal observer Friday said BP is likely walking a fine line in trying to convince Barbier that it was not grossly negligent for the accident.

A grossly negligent finding would result in a four-fold increase in the fines BP would have to pay for violating the federal Clean Water Act. It also could leave the company liable for punitive damages for private claims.



Of the three defendants left in the case, BP operated the Macondo well, Transocean owned and manned the Deepwater Horizon rig used to drill the well and Halliburton poured the cement lining that was designed to plug the well.



Though some change has come to the liability landscape since the trial began Feb. 25, including all remaining claims being dismissed against two defendants in the case, BP's strategy is expected to remain the same. That is: hammer home the argument that the Macondo well blowout stemmed from multiple failures by BP as well as its partners in the drilling operation, and as a result BP should not be found to have committed "gross negligence" or "willful misconduct" in its oversight of the well.



"If they can get the court to allocate 50 percent of the blame between those two subcontractors, then that will be a major victory," said Blaine LeCesne, a tort law professor at Loyola University in New Orleans.

"And then, of course, the other thing they need to do is convince the court that their own negligence was of the ordinary and not of the gross variety," LeCesne added. "If they can accomplish those two objectives, they will come as close to winning this case as they can."

LeCesne was less than optimistic about BP's chances: He doesn't believe "any more than 20 percent" of the liability for the deadly catastrophe will fall to the well's contractors.



"The more fault that's attributed to the subcontractors, the less likely there is to be a finding of gross negligence by BP," he said. "And if there's no gross negligence by BP, there's less of a chance of punitive damages being awarded."

The playing field of defendants on which BP has been jockeying to shift the blame has also thinned in recent weeks.

Barbier granted a motion freeing Cameron International as a defendant in the first phase of the trial. Cameron manufactured the blowout preventer, located on the wellhead on the Gulf floor, which was intended to use a series of rams, valves and shearing blades to close off the well when oil and gas from deep below the seabed started gushing out.

Barbier granted a motion last month dismissing all claims against M-I, a Houston-based subsidiary of Schlumberger that supplied the drilling mud used at the Macondo well.

For BP, as it works to counter claims that its corporate culture stressed reducing costs over safety, that leaves two main targets, both with weaknesses exposed by various expert witnesses in the first six weeks of the trial.



For Transocean, the issue is a botched negative pressure test that failed to indicate gas leaking up the well. The test was carried out by the company's drilling rig crew being supervised by BP. For Halliburton, the question concerns the cement slurry mixture it used on the well that had "a low probability of success," according to testimony from a top Halliburton executive.

"They're going to hammer away at those two main areas of responsibility, and they're also going to stress that none of their own decisions were motivated by cost-savings or profit considerations," LeCesne said.

Steven Newman, the head of Transocean, testified March 19 that the rig's crew members "should have done more" to recognize problem signs during drilling and ordered the operation shut down. But Newman contended the crew's failure was caused by following the improper recommendations of BP officials overseeing the operation.

And questions about whether the cement mixture used by Halliburton to try to seal the well met industry standards have dogged the Houston-based oilfield services giant since the months after the spill, in line with what investigators with the national Oil Spill Commission, the seven-member panel appointed by President Barack Obama, found in 2010. The mixture had failed multiple tests in the weeks leading up to the disaster, according to the commission's findings.



But for BP, LeCesne believes it could be death-by-a-thousand-cuts.



"BP has a different problem, because their conduct involved a variety of arguably negative actions," he said. "There were multiple acts of negligence," whereas its partners in the well "were much more limited in terms of the potential actions that contributed to the spill."