The massive "A Whale" oil skimmer has effectively been beached after it proved inefficient in sucking up oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill.

The oil is too dispersed to take advantage of the converted Taiwanese supertanker's enormous capacity, said Bob Grantham, a spokesman for shipowner TMT.

He said BP's use of chemical dispersants prevented A Whale, billed as the world's largest skimmer, from collecting a "significant amount" of oil during a week of testing that ended Friday.

"When dispersants are used in high volume virtually from the point that oil leaves the well, it presents real challenges for high-volume skimming," Grantham said in a written statement that did not include oil-collection figures from the test.

The Coast Guard had approved an additional week of testing July 8 after initial tests in rough seas over the Fourth of July weekend were "inconclusive."

Nobu Su, TMT's billionaire majority owner and chief executive, dispatched the brand new $160 million supertanker from China to Portugal to be converted into a skimmer within days of the April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig.

After oily water flows through intake vents cut into the ship's bow, it is pumped into a series of tanks, where oil rises to the top. The oil is then siphoned off and the water is pumped back into the sea.

TMT had hired a top-flight New York public relations firm to drum up support for the 10-story-tall, 1,100-foot-long ship that it boasted could process 21 million gallons oily water a day. That's about 75 percent of the total collected in two and a half months by 500 smaller skimmers working to clean up the massive BP spill.

But Thad Allen, the national incident commander for the spill, had expressed skepticism, saying A Whale would be more effective with thicker concentrations of oil than the widely dispersed slick emanating from BP's Macondo well.

Su emphasized that his company absorbed all costs to convert and test the tanker. He vowed to continue refining the mega-skimmer for use in future spills.

"We intend to put what we have learned to good use as part of a global solution to oil spill response wherever future incidents may occur," Su said.