“It’s important that in the 21st century, we’ve only just realized that one of the most common substances on the planet, petroleum, has a cardio-toxic impact on vertebrate hearts,” said Barbara A. Block, a marine biologist at Stanford University and one of the study’s authors.

A BP spokesman, Jason Ryan, said the study offered no evidence that the oil spill had reduced fish populations. “The oil concentrations used in these lab experiments were rarely seen in the gulf during or after the Deepwater Horizon accident,” he said. “In addition, the authors themselves note that it is nearly impossible to determine the early-life impact to these species.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Ryan’s statement was at odds with the study, which said that the concentrations of chemicals responsible for changes in the embryos during laboratory experiments were comparable to those in water samples collected during the spill.

Other research published last month in the journal Science concluded that the changes in heartbeats and development were linked to oil components called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Among other effects, that study said, the chemicals impede the process by which calcium ions in heart muscle prompt regular heartbeats.

Photographs in the latest study depicted what the study called nearly identical physical distortions in the hearts, body shape and eyes of yellowtail and bluefin tuna and amberjack embryos that were exposed to oil. The fishes’ heartbeats also slowed and developed arrhythmia.

Bluefin, which were spawning in the area of the spill when it occurred, exhibited the full range of heart defects more often than the two other fish, the study said. The higher the concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, the more severe the deformities, it found. But at comparatively low concentrations, the scientists wrote, 50 percent or more of tuna still developed fluids around their hearts and yolk sacs. Those with the most fluid, “would not be expected to survive into the feeding stage.”

Another author of the study, John P. Incardona, of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Northwest Fisheries Science Center, said that even many embryos that seemed outwardly normal would most likely face problems later.

“Those fish in all likelihood would survive the immediate effect of oil exposure,” he said, but could have abnormal heartbeats “that could reduce their aerobic performance — which in a fish means swimming.” For fish like tuna that rely on speed to catch prey, that could lead to a shortened life span, he said.