The Washington-based Organisation for International Investment will meet CBI, the Chartered Institute of Taxation, Business International and others in London to warn them that anti-British rhetoric has increased and must be countered since the Deepwater Horizon spill in the Gulf of Mexico.

Foreign companies have already been restricted from access to US government bail-out money and some important government contracts.

Nancy McLernon, chief executive of the group representing US subsidiaries of foreign companies, believes the BP crisis has only made this trend worse.

“There are many British companies expressing concern about how they are now seen due to what’s happened to BP,” she said.

“On campaign finance, some of the language on the floor of the house has specifically mentioned BP and said should we allow foreign companies like them to influence our elections – even though thousands of Americans work for BP and invest in it.” She said the recent controversy surrounding the European defence company EADS bidding for a major government tanker contract also illustrated a growing “unfortunate” atmosphere of protectionism.

The US President, Barack Obama, has repeatedly emphasised BP’s foreign ownership, calling it British Petroleum despite its decades-old change of name.

And Sarah Palin, the Republican former vice-presidential candidate, whose husband worked for BP for 18 years, urged those in the Gulf of Mexico to “learn from Alaska’s lesson with foreign oil companies”. “Don’t naively trust – verify,” she added in a Facebook warning against the oil company.

BP was the majority owner and operator of the oil well that is leaking up to 60,000 barrels of oil a day.

However, there were also US contractors that worked on or supplied parts to the rig that have not come under the same pressure to explain their actions. These include Halliburton and the Swiss-incorporated and Texas-based rig owner, Transocean.

A number of politicians have sought to capitalise on BP’s unpopularity when trying to push through legislation.

Campaigning for a bill on election spending disclosure, Chris Van Hollen, a senior Democratic representative, distributed a memo to every member of his party, arguing: “Unless we act, there is nothing to stop foreign companies like BP from funnelling millions of dollars to some group like Americans for Clean Oceans, to secretly fund advertising against any member of Congress.” He wants to stop “manipulation of elections by fly-by-night hit groups funded by US-based foreign corporations like BP”.

However, critics pointed out there was no such organisation as Americans for Clean Oceans exists.

BP and its employees have given more than $3.5m to federal election candidates over the past 20 years, according to the Centre for Responsive Politics. President Obama was the largest recipient of BP’s cash, receiving a total of $77,051.