The U.S. Coast Guard has released four videos showing portions of a four-day underwater survey in mid-December of the BP Macondo well site and of wreckage of the Deepwater Horizon semisubmersible drilling rig on the floor of the Gulf of Mexico near the well.

The survey by the Olympic Triton and its remotely operated vehicles was required of BP and Transocean, the owner of the Deepwater Horizon, after satellite images and photos from an airplane spotted oil sheens at the well site.

On Dec. 18, BP, Transocean and the Coast Guard announced the surveys found no oil coming from the wells or the wreckage.

The four videos, edited by a Coast Guard official and released Friday, were taken from the continuous footage recorded during the four-day survey.

The first of the videos, a survey of the original wellhead and two relief wells drilled to stop the flow of oil from the damaged well after the April 2010 explosion and fire that sank the rig, begins with a view of the concrete cap atop the plugged well. The circular cap has the words “IN MEMORY OF THE DEEP WATER HORIZON 11” stenciled in black on both sides, a reference to the 11 rig workers killed during the accident.

A second video includes closeups of the wreckage of the rig strewn along the ocean floor, with some large pieces of metal clearly mangled as a result of the accident. The video includes footage taken while workers at the surface used the remotely operated vehicles a mile below to collect samples for testing for possible oil leakage.

Those tests did not find any oil from the Macondo well, though officials are still trying to identify the makeup of white droplets spotted in the water during the survey.

A third video captures an ROV’s survey of the riser pipe that once connected the Macondo wellhead to the Deepwater Horizon rig on the surface. The pipe collapsed to the ocean floor during the accident, and was the source for some of the oil released during the weeks it took to halt the leak.

The 86-ton, 40-foot high steel cofferdam, used during an early failed attempt to capture leaking oil from the well and guide it to the surface, was the subject of the fourth video. BP and the Coast Guard earlier this month said that the survey found no additional oil leaking from the container, which had holes in it sealed in October after droplets of oil were discovered floating out of them during an earlier survey.



