The amount discovered is tiny in comparison to what has coated beaches so far in the hardest-hit parts of the Gulf coast in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and the Florida Panhandle.

A Coast Guard official said it was possible that the oil hitched a ride on a ship and was not carried naturally by currents to the barrier islands of the eastern Texas coast, but there was no way to know for sure.

TEXAS CITY, Texas -- Tar balls from the Gulf oil spill found on a Texas beach were confirmed Monday as the first evidence that gushing crude from the Deepwater Horizon well has reached all the Gulf states.

With sick and dead dolphins turning up along Louisiana's coast, federal regulators are curbing an oil and natural gas exploration company from using seismic equipment that sends out underwater pulses known to disturb marine mammals.

If a future oil spill in the Caribbean Sea threatens American shores, a new federal plan obtained by The Associated Press would hinge on cooperation from neighboring foreign governments. Now that Cuba is the neighbor drilling for oil, cooperation is hard to guarantee.

If a future oil spill in the Caribbean Sea threatens American shores, a new federal plan obtained by The Associated Press would hinge on cooperation from neighboring foreign governments. Now that Cuba is the neighbor drilling for oil, cooperation is hard to guarantee.

If a future oil spill in the Caribbean Sea threatens American shores, a new federal plan obtained by The Associated Press would hinge on cooperation from neighboring foreign governments. Now that Cuba is the neighbor drilling for oil, cooperation is hard to guarantee.

M arch 9 I received an e mail from Congressman Tim Scott touting the Republicans plan in the House to introduce a new bill to increase domestic oil and natural gas production. This will bring down the price of gasoline, it said. Also mentioned in the email was that the bill will reduce the need to import oil from the Persian Gulf.

The oil's arrival in Texas was predicted Friday by an analysis from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which gave a 40 percent chance of crude reaching the area.

"It was just a matter of time that some of the oil would find its way to Texas," said Hans Graber, a marine physicist at the University of Miami and co-director of the Center for Southeastern Tropical Advanced Remote Sensing.

About five gallons of tar balls were found Saturday on the Bolivar Peninsula, northeast of Galveston, said Capt. Marcus Woodring, the Coast Guard commander for the Houston/Galveston sector.

Two gallons were found Sunday on the peninsula and Galveston.

The distance between the western reach of the tar balls in Texas and the most eastern reports of oil in Florida is about 550 miles. Oil was first spotted on land near the mouth of the Mississippi River on April 29.

The spill is reaching deeper into Louisiana. Strings of oil were seen Monday in the Rigolets, one of two waterways that connect the Gulf with Lake Pontchartrain, the large lake north of New Orleans.

"So far it's scattered stuff showing up, mostly tar balls," said Louisiana Office of Fisheries Assistant Secretary Randy Pausina. "It will pull out with the tide, and then show back up."

Pausina said he expected the oil to clear the passes and move directly into the lake, taking a backdoor route to New Orleans.

The news of the spill's reach comes at a time that most of the offshore skimming operations in the Gulf have been halted by choppy seas and high winds.

A tropical system that had been lingering off Louisiana flared up Monday afternoon, bringing heavy rain and winds.

Last week, the faraway Hurricane Alex idled the skimming fleet off Alabama, Florida and Mississippi with choppy seas and stiff winds. Now they're stymied by a succession of smaller storms that could last well into this week.

The storms have not affected drilling work on a relief well that BP says is the best chance for finally plugging the leak.

The company remains confident that drilling to be finished by mid-August.

But what if it doesn't work?

At the very least, oil would continue to spill while workers try something else.

The British company says it is developing "backups for the backups," but they're short on details.

The relief well is on track to be completed in August, but it's a complicated task.

Workers have to tap into a target the size of a dinner plate thousands of feet below the ocean floor.

A second relief well will be a backup.

The discovery of the tar balls in Texas provoked a quick dispatch of cleaning crews and a vow that BP will pick up the tab.

"Any Texas shores impacted by the Deepwater spill will be cleaned up quickly and BP will be picking up the tab," Texas Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson said.

As BP's costs for the disastrous Gulf of Mexico oil spill climb to just over $3 billion, the British oil giant is billing partners Anadarko Petroleum Corp. and Japan's Mitsui for their shares of the cleanup.

BP has billed Anadarko, a 25 percent stakeholder in the blown-out well, for more than a quarter billion dollars so far. It also has reportedly billed Mitsui, a 10 percent partner, for $111 million.

"They are partners in the field, and as responsible partners we would expect them to bear some of the costs," BP spokeswoman Sheila Williams declared on Monday.

Anadarko, based in The Woodlands, Texas, said in a statement that it is reviewing the $272.2 million bill sent last week and "assessing our contractual remedies."

Anadarko CEO Jim Hackett argued last month that his company should be excluded from paying for the spill because of BP's "reckless decisions and actions" in its handling of the well.