Lumpy, degraded oil collected in the Mississippi Sound has tested positive for several of the main ingredients in the Corexit dispersant used in connection with the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, according to scientists working for a New Orleans-based lawyer.

Officials with the federal government and BP PLC have maintained throughout the oil spill that no dispersant products have been used near shorelines in Alabama or Mississippi.

“It is difficult to comment on testing conducted by third parties,” BP spokeswoman Dawn Patience wrote in an e-mail. “Throughout the response period, we have worked hand-in-hand and under the direction of the Coast Guard and EPA on the use of dispersants.”

Marco Kaltofen, part of the group of scientists who found the oil in Mississippi Sound, said it was impossible to determine when the dispersant had been applied to the oil. Results from the tests, which were conducted in a Colorado laboratory, indicated the oil was from the Deepwater Horizon well, he said.

“I consider this to be very interesting scientifically, as few samples detect dispersant, much less three of their major ingredients in the same sample,” said Kaltofen.

The material was collected by a group of scientists working for attorney Stuart Smith, who is representing the Louisiana-based United Commercial Fisherman’s Association and the Louisiana Environmental Action Network in a potential lawsuit regarding damage from the oil spill. The group found the oil about a mile north of Horn Island on Aug. 9.

“EPA samples found only one indication of dispersant near shore in Louisiana. That location was sampled several times with no other detection,” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency spokeswoman Terri White said in a Monday e-mail. “There is no authorization to apply any dispersant at this time. If anyone has information about this, they need to report it immediately so it can be investigated and referred to law enforcement.”

Jerry Moran, a New Orleans-based photographer who accompanied the group to document the sampling effort, said that the material looked unlike anything he’d seen during months of photographing the spill.

“We saw birds diving over a patch of oil. I’d never seen it that thick before. It looked like cauliflower. I had never seen it that texture before,” Moran said. “There was a rainbow sheen around us, a really thick, colorful sheen.”

Press-Register reporters encountered a similar material — strangely textured oil with a pronounced sheen — in Mobile Bay and Mississippi Sound several times in July and early August. The day before Moran’s group found the dispersant and oil mix, the Press-Register documented oil in a marsh on Horn Island.

BP and federal officials said that dispersants have not been used in the Gulf since July 19.

Smith, the lawyer who funded Kaltofen’s sampling expedition, discounted the notion that dispersants had not been used near shore.

“I personally saw C-130s applying dispersants from my hotel room in the Florida Panhandle. They were spraying directly adjacent to the beach right at dusk,” said Smith. “Fishermen I’ve talked to say they’ve been sprayed. This idea they are not using this stuff near the coast is nonsense.”





