There continues to be no evidence that harmful levels of chemicals from the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill are in seafood, but initial study results show that former spill cleanup workers are carrying biomarkers of many chemicals contained in the oil in their bodies, and women and children along Louisiana's coast are reporting health effects believed linked to oil.



Those were some of the public health findings discussed Tuesday during the second day of the three-day Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill & Ecosystem Science Conference, which is aimed at understanding the effects of pollution resulting from the spill and its effect on natural systems in the Gulf and along the shoreline, as well as on the people who live and work there.

Several studies described Tuesday also indicate a significant percentage of coastal residents are reporting continued mental health problems related to the spill, ranging from anxiety and depression to post-traumatic stress syndrome.

The seafood safety issue has remained a bone of contention for some fishermen and coastal residents who have reported finding either deformed fish or evidence of hydrocarbons in shrimp or oysters.

But Robert Dickey, director of the FDA Gulf Coast Seafood Laboratory and the agency's Division of Seafood Science and Technology, insists that the testing conducted in the aftermath of the spill, the most comprehensive in the history of the agency, continues to show that commercial seafood is safe to eat.

"The bottom line is that the seafood is as safe to consume now as it was before the spill," Dickey said. "We're back to background levels. We were in the fall (of 2010) shortly after the spill dissipated."

Those levels remain 100 to 1,000 times lower than the official levels of concern for certain oil molecules called polychlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons, or PAHs, he said.

The FDA tests for a small group of PAHs that potentially cause cancer, but does not test for all of the hundreds of PAH compounds contained in oil, he said.

"Folks are understandably concerned about the variety of different compounds that are out there in nature," he said. "But there are thousands of different compounds in oil and there's no way we can monitor and analyze for every one of them.

"What has been decided internationally is that we focus on the potentially cancer-causing compounds, and take a representative subset of those for which we have a lot of information," he said. "If we monitor for those, we know that's going to be representative of the potential mixture as a whole."

For the BP spill, officials first used what's called a "smell test" as a rapid method to determine what areas should be marked off limits for fishing. The odor of oil in shrimp, for instance, was a clear indication of a problem requiring closure.

Then, before an area could be removed from closure, it went through the more complex search for PAHs, and only when the PAH levels were below FDA standards was the ban on fishing for the area removed.

Dickey also defended the agency's decision to use the results of a national survey of seafood consumption in determining whether levels of contaminants were a problem.

The national survey produced an estimate of the amount of seafood that 90 percent of regular seafood consumers eat, and also estimated the weight of an average seafood consumer. Both are required to determine how much contaminants could cause health problems.

Some researchers at this week's meeting have suggested that the national figures underestimate the amount of seafood eaten by coastal residents with access to cheap and plentiful seafood and also underestimate the weight of some populations, such as the Vietnamese community in eastern New Orleans, who eat large quantities of seafood.

Dickey said the FDA recognizes such discrepancies in determining the seafood contamination standards, though.

"By definition, there are 10 percent of people who eat more and we know that they're there," he said. The agency's calculations of the risk of individual compounds also is overly conservative: "We call it a safety buffer."

The biggest study of oil spill-related health effects is a 10-year program to track health effects of spill workers being conducted by the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences, and preliminary results indicate that workers are carrying biomarkers in their bodies of chemicals contained in the oil spilled from the BP Macondo well.

The agency already has completed telephone interviews with more than 32,000 workers, and home visits with 9,967 of those, said Richard Kwok, a staff scientist with the agency's chronic disease epidemiology group.

The study has conducted more than 800 interviews in Spanish and more than 1,000 in Vietnamese, he said.

Kwok's presentation described information about who is participating in the study, but gave no information about the symptoms these workers may be experiencing. The study, however, is aimed at identifying and tracking the actual health effects over the next 10 years.

The workers held a wide variety of jobs during the efforts to contain and clean up the spill, both on the water and onshore, and individual exposure to oil and oil contaminants varied dramatically by both their jobs and when they worked, he said.

The study is trying to identify the exposure of workers to a variety of chemicals linked to health problems contained in the oil and natural gas released during the accident, including benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylene, and the chemicals contained in dispersants used during the spill.

The study will also attempt to determine how long workers were potentially exposed, and the type of exposure: to the skin or inhalation.

Initial research already confirms that those working on vessels during the spill cleanup as roustabouts or floor hands had higher exposures to the chemicals of concern than those who worked inside the ship, Kwok said.

And comparing initial chemical testing results with the dates that were worked also indicates that while the concentration of chemicals measured in workers changed when the oil well was capped in July 2010, the chemicals to which the workers were exposed were more likely to come from the BP oil than from diesel or gasoline fumes to which they also were exposed, Kwok said.

A separate NIOSH-sponsored study, Women and Their Children's Health, or WaTCH, will follow the health issues facing 2,500 women and 800 children in seven parishes in southeastern Louisiana, including Orleans, St. Bernard, Plaquemines, Jefferson, St. Mary and Terrebonne, though the New Orleans and St. Bernard participants will be limited to people living closest to the coast, said Edward Trapido, an epidemiologist and associate dean for research at the LSU School of Public Health in New Orleans.

The study has enrolled 500 women and their children, and initial information gathered from questionnaires answered by 224 women shows a statistically significant relationship between their reported symptoms and exposure to the spill, Trapido said.

In the initial period of exposure, the participants reported wheezing; tightness in chest; shortness of breath; watery, burning or itchy eyes; stuffy, itchy or runny nose; burning in nose, throat or lungs; skin rash; sore or blisters lasting at least three days; severe headaches or migranes; nausea; excessive fatigue or tiredness; diarrhea; sore throat; and being unable to concentrate, Trapido said.

The women could have been exposed to fumes from the spill in the air, from washing clothes, from participating in hunting and fishing trips in areas contaminated with oil, or by visiting nearby beaches.

In the last month of 2010, the women continued to report some of the symptoms, with only watery burning or itchy eyes; the burning in the nose and throat and very acute responses to the oil exposure disappearing, he said.

Trapido warned that the findings are preliminary, and only represent a small portion of the 2,500 women who will eventually be enrolled. The delay between the spill and the questioning of the women also could skew the results, as could other stressors faced by the women, including hurricanes, the economy and the continuing publicity surrounding the spill, he said.

Similar health effects were recorded among residents of Baldwin and Mobile counties in Alabama in a study conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and the Alabama Health Department, said Melissa Morrison, a CDC official. That study collected information from healthcare facilities in the two Alabama coastal counties between May and October 2010.

Initial results of the WaTCH study concerning mental health effects of the spill among 150 women indicate 31 percent showed evidence of depression a year after the spill, which compares to a rate of 20 percent in the nation's general population, and only 17 percent among women in the area of Alaska affected by the Exxon Valdez oil spill, said Ariane Rung, an associate professor at the LSU School of Public Health.

Those most likely to be reporting depression, Rung said, are those with greater exposure to the spill, African Americans, single people, those of a younger age and those who are unemployed, she said.

A study aimed at health effects among children in Louisiana and Florida conducted by Columbia University found that more than 40 percent of 1,437 parents living less than 10 miles from the coast had been directly exposed to the spill and more than a third of the parents reported physical or mental health symptoms among their children, said David Abramson, director of the school's National Center for Disaster Preparedness.

The parents raised a variety of issues when questioned by the researchers, including access to specialty medical care and mental health services, Abramson said. They also were concerned about clusters of unexplained symptoms among their children, including bleeding ears, nose bleeds, and the early start of menstruation among girls, he said.



