Admiral Landry said the heavy piece of emergency equipment at the well head known as a blowout preventer appeared to have done its job and was sealing off a flow of oil from below. “It is not a guarantee,” she said, “but right now we continue to see no oil emanating from the well.”

Nevertheless, the Coast Guard and the teams it is working with from BP, the company leasing the rig, and Transocean, the Swiss company that owned the rig, said they remained on high alert. “No, we are absolutely not saying this is over,” said Lt. Sue Kerver, a spokeswoman for the Coast Guard. “We remain cautiously optimistic, but we need to remain prepared for the worst-case scenario.”

There were still too many uncertainties surrounding the accident, Lieutenant Kerver said. It is still not known, for example, what caused the explosion in the first place. It is also not known whether the blowout preventer can continue to hold. Additional measures, like cementing over the valve, are being considered.

Photo

Another mystery that the Coast Guard said remained unsolved was the whereabouts of some 700,000 gallons of diesel fuel that had been stored inside the pontoons of the rig before the accident. Fuel may have been released in the blast that sank the rig Thursday and was consumed in the fire, but it is also possible that it remains intact beneath the surface and could spill out.

Still, with the catastrophe beneath the waves contained for now, government and oil industry forces were able to concentrate their efforts on cleaning up the estimated 180,000 barrels of oil and water mix that resulted from the explosion. At midafternoon, officials described a slick that spread roughly 16 square miles in the Gulf and was sheen-thin in most areas but contained some deeper pockets of crude.

Despite the ugliness of darkened waters, the ecological danger the slick posed to the mainland seemed to recede Friday. While the spill was serious, it remained 45 miles offshore, slowly edging northeast. Projections indicated that even in five days it would still be 40 miles offshore.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“We have no trajectory showing it reaching the shoreline at all,” Admiral Landry said.

Marine biologists and other experts said it would be a long time before they would know how much damage the spill did to the local ecosystems, but they said it would be far worse if it hits shore.

Still, there were possible consequences to seabirds and fish. Some fish eggs end up on the top layer of water, which is affected by the sheen.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Offshore it is much more subtle than onshore,” said Doug Helton, a fisheries biologist who coordinates oil spill responses for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “but it still is very serious.”

Chris Reddy, director of the Coastal Ocean Institute at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, said there were other factors to consider, like the thickness of the sheen and how long it lasted on the surface before sun and wave action broke it up.

Also, different creatures have different tolerances for oil. “If you get any oil on a bird at all they don’t do well,” he said.

Still, he said, he was impressed by the oil spill response so far. “I feel we are in pretty good hands.”