LEADER ARTICLE

Kickstart Kashmir

Deputy prime minister L K Advani's decision not to invite international observers for the elections in Kashmir might in principle be the right thing to do.

But with so much importance being attached to these elections, particularly by the international community, India would gain more by making the whole affair transparent.

It would only help in establishing India's bona fides in the eyes of the world. And whatever its results, Kashmir will still be a part of India, since even the UN does not challenge its accession to India.

Opposition to such an initiative mostly comes from all sorts of political bodies within India, particularly from the politicians in J&K, who have for far too long, held India hostage to their whims and fancies.

And even if the voter turnout in the forthcoming elections is poor, and Pakistan rejects its results — which it will certainly do — India must remind Islamabad that it would do well to first get back to the democratic process. Besides, Pakistan itself was created on the vote of only 15 per cent on the entire Muslim populace of the subcontinent.

But elections apart, what the Kashmiris require is good governance, because "to solve the problem of Kashmir, you must solve the problems in Kashmir".

However, a breakthrough between New Delhi and Islamabad over the Kashmir issue would still be most unlikely, given the diametrically opposite positions of the two. Pakistan has a one-point agenda of getting Kashmir to secede from India, while India's policy on Kashmir lacks coherence and can mean many things to many people.

This situation remains hopelessly unresolved, bogged down as it is, by the semantics of the two documents that dominate the positions taken by the two sides. These are the UN Resolution on Kashmir, and the Shimla Accord.

Both these have achieved little and are now a diplomatic dead-end. The UN Resolution of August 13, 1948 calls for a Pakistani withdrawal from Jammu & Kashmir before India can 'determine the future status of Jammu and Kashmir in accordance with the will of its people'.

Pakistan says it does not trust India's intentions, hence its withdrawal is out of the question. It also sees the resolution purely in an Indo-Pak context and doesn't want to address the third option, i.e., independence for the people of Kashmir.

India says that the resolutions cannot be implemented without Pakistan's withdrawal and, more important, half a century later the resolutions have lost their validity. Backing New Delhi's stand, UN secretary general Kofi Annan has also said that the UN Resolution on Kashmir is now irrelevant.