This week's " Poke Me ", invites your comments on ''. The feature will be reproduced on the edit page of the Saturday edition of the newspaper with a pick of readers' best comments.So be poked and fire in your comments to us right away. Comments reproduced in the paper will be the ones that support or oppose the views expressed here intelligently. Feel free to add reference links etc, in support of your comments.Jammu and Kashmir goes to the polls next month with the backdrop of the aftermath of a natural disaster, a perceptible decline in support for the ruling National Conference (NC), a revived buoyancy of the People’s Democratic Party (PDP), and the BJP’s strident Mission-44 plan (of getting a majority in the 87-seat assembly). The polls also take place amid the perception among significant sections in India that Narendra Modi government’s bullish stance on ceasefire violations by Pakistan has yielded satisfactory results.Though striving to ride on the continuing Modi magic and a promise of good administration, the kernel of the BJP’s tactic in J&K is based on its projection of being the defender of Hindus with other parties presented as a refuge of Muslims. From this point of view, the forthcoming electoral battle becomes the most momentous electoral event in J&K since the one in 1983. The earlier one cemented the political polarisation on religious lines after Indira Gandhi campaigned aggressively, raising the bogey of a ‘Muslim invasion’ in the Jammu region because of the Resettlement Bill.The contentious Bill, passed by the-then NC government, gave Kashmiris who left for Pakistan between 1947 and 1954 the right to return, reclaim their properties and resettle. The issue was opposed by Gandhi and she got President Zail Singh to seek a presidential reference, despite the Act being passed by the J&K assembly twice in 1982.Gandhi’s strategy yielded dividends in the 1983 elections and the Congress won 26 of the 75 seats at stake while the NC secured 46. Barring an odd constituency, all victories of the Congress were in the Jammu and Ladakh regions, while the NC swept the Valley. The 1983 poll set the tone for any future Congress-NC alliance – the Congress allotting itself seats mainly in the Jammu and Ladakh regions, while the NC limiting itself mainly to the Valley.Eyebrows were raised when the BJP unveiled its Mission 44 scheme after winning three seats from J&K in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections. No senior leader made a downright admission, but the party is thought to believe that the time is ripe for a ‘Hindu chief minister’ in J&K. The BJP argument: If Indira Gandhi could appoint a Muslim as Maharashtra’s chief minister, why can’t the BJP follow suit? But Jammu region has just 27 seats and Ladakh elects four MLAs. So how can the BJP reach the 44-plus target?The BJP aims to benefit from any call by the separatists to boycott the polls. Such a call would result in an extremely low turnout in constituencies where these groups have significant political and social clout. In 2008, less than 5,000 voters turned up in five constituencies and the margins of victory were narrow.Most of these constituencies witnessed an almost en masse exodus of Kashmiri Pandits in the early 1990s. In recent months, the BJP has galvanised efforts to enrol them in voter lists and hopefully to make them vote. BJP workers are aiming to ensure near-complete voting from Kashmiri migrants who, in several constituencies, number more than the votes cast in 2008. Even if the BJP wins a few seats in the Valley, political legitimacy will elude it. Besides, it will strengthen the separatists’ discourse that ‘India’ interferes in electoral processes and disallows Kashmiris from making their own choices.The first Kashmir-related announcement made by BJP after forming government at the Centre -- that it would review Article 370 -- raised alarm bells in the Valley. This will be a significant element of the BJP plank, besides promising more integration with the rest of India. No doubt that this is welcome. But before that, the BJP has to reach out to Kashmiris on its own and not as a representative of just one section of the people of J&K.Catchy though the slogan may be, the BJP is likely to fall short of ‘44’. This raises questions about the manner in which the PDP is cosying up to Modi and about the two parties planning to form a coalition government. While getting a toehold in the state government would be Modi’s crowning glory, the move would be fraught with risks, especially if the BJP foists the principle of chief ministers by rotation.A good leader must be able to place the interest of the nation above personal and party interests. The BJP has made no effort to secure electoral support of Muslims in states where they are in a minority because it claims to reject politics based on religious identities. Yet, it isn’t shying away from pandering to Hindu interests in J&K.Normalcy is a tall order in Kashmir. If the BJP wishes to be the state’s benefactor and earn accolades over time from the people, it needs to mount a non-sectarian campaign and stay away from government while simultaneously centrally-assisting Srinagar in disaster relief. Placating ambitions of politicians from Jammu is liable to push Kashmir further away.