12 lakh tulips to beckon people this year

Our Correspondent Srinagar, March 10

After great success in 2008, the tulip garden in Srinagar is all set to attract people this year as well with an added dimension. Contrary to 2008, tulips blooming this year would be indigenous with no imports. Director, Floriculture, Kashmir, GS Naqash says that the garden would be open between March 20 and 25. “Last year we had imported 9 lakh tulips from Holland and this year there would be no imports. About 12 lakh tulips, which have been maintained, would bloom in the garden and all of them have been grown here,” says Naqash. The floriculture director said 80,000 persons visited the garden in 2008 and exuded confidence that the number would cross 1 lakh this year. “We could not project garden last year but this time around the preparations are complete,” he adds. Naqash said last time the visitors to garden included 1,000 foreign tourists and hoped that this would be more for this year. He added that bookings had already been made by tourists with various hotels and the Tourism department. The Floriculture Department had imported 2,80,000 tulips during 2007, but with people showing interest in production of this bulbous flower the indigenous production would be on display this year at the garden. “The temperature and other climatic conditions prevalent here are very much favourable for production of bulbous flowers like tulips. I am glad a beginning has been made and hope the things would improve in times to come,”says Fida Ali Alamgeer, floriculture development extension officer, Department of Agriculture. Rs 50 would be entry charges for adults while Rs 20 for children.

Power Dept incurs Rs 13.7-cr avoidable interest

Tribune News Service Jammu, March 10

Lax attitude of the Power Development Department (PDD) that boasts of Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme to check transmission and distribution losses in the state has resulted in an avoidable interest liability of Rs 13.7 crore, says the CAG report for the year ending March 2008. After rural electrification cooperative society was established in 1978 to provide electricity to the rural areas of Samba district, including the government departments, the same had been dissolved in 1997. Report says, the society was financed by loan assistance from the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) and the revenue realised through consumers but consequent upon default by the government departments in payments of dues and stoppage of loan by the REC, it had to be dissolved. The PDD took over the society and all its assets and liabilities rested with the department. Audit of records of chief engineer, Electric Maintenance and Rural Electrification Wing, Jammu, revealed that total value of assets amounting to Rs 27.13 crore (excluding revenue arrears of Rs 6.42 crore) taken over by the PDD was considerably higher than its liabilities amounting to Rs 8.92 crore. It also included a REC loan of Rs 2.34 crore guaranteed by the state government. Although a new division was created by the PDD with acquired assets, steps were not initiated to liquidate the loan that swelled to Rs 16.04 crore, including interest and penalty of Rs 13.70 crore till March 2008. Though the REC has been sending quarterly demands to the department to repay the loan, yet the state government did not provide funds for the purpose. The EM&RE chief engineer stated that the matter regarding liquidation of the REC loan had been pursued the day society was taken over but the government that added to the liability had taken no decision. The chief engineer stated that efforts were on to settle the issue to avoid addition of interest and penalty on the loan.

Legislative Council Poll

BJP, PDP helped Panthers candidate win: Cong

Dinesh Manhotra

Tribune News Service Udhampur, March 10

The “surprise” victory of the Panthers Party candidate has provided much ammunition to Congress and NC leaders to step up attack to expose the “unholy nexus” between the BJP and the PDP, which were responsible for the 62-day-long turmoil in Jammu and Kashmir regions, respectively. The PDP and the BJP have been repeatedly denying the allegation of secret understanding during the Legislative Council elections, The PDP leadership has reasons to defend its decision to support the Panthers Party candidate in the Upper House elections, but the BJP is finding it difficult to counter the Congress’ propaganda that the saffron party has joined hands with “anti-national” and “anti-Jammu” forces. As Sayed Rafiq Ahmed Shah, Panthers Party candidate from the Kashmir valley, won the council elections with the support of BJP MLAs, Congress leaders minced no words in attacking the saffron party for supporting a person whose previous record was dubious. The Congress has launched an aggressive campaign to take on the BJP for joining hands with the PDP in the council elections. “The victory of the Panthers Party candidate in the Legislative Council elections has exposed the BJP, as it joined hands with the PDP and voted in the favour of that candidate whose previous record was suspicious”, Ravinder Sharma, the spokesman for the Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC), said. The Congress spokesman alleged that the Panthers Party candidate had been active in militancy and was arrested under the Public Safety Act (PSA) for propagating secessionist ideology. Former Chief Minister and NC president Farooq Abdullah stated yesterday at Doda that the BJP had brought militants into the council. Admitting that the BJP has provided an opportunity to the party to rake up the issue, the Congress said in the days to come party workers would take up the matter with the masses in the Jammu region. “Just six months back, BJP leaders were baying for the blood of PDP leaders. But today they joined hands with the latter to elect a militant to the Legislative Council”, Sharma alleged and termed the decision of the BJP as “lacking in political vision”.

PDP refutes Farooq’s charge of ties with BJP

Ehsan Fazili/Tribune News Service Srinagar March 10

The PDP has described as absurd the allegations by the ruling NC that it had joined hands with the BJP saying the ruling party was indulging in propaganda. A PDP spokesman said this while reacting to allegations by NC president Farooq Abdullah and Congress state chief Saif-ud-Din Soz that the PDP had joined hands with the BJP in the recent elections to the Legislative Council. Had that been so, the spokesman said, it would have been a candidate from the PDP or BJP who would have won and not someone from the Panthers Party. Reminding Farooq Abdullah of his “time-tested and open links” with the Sangh Parivar, the spokesman said his severing of ties with the NDA was only an eyewash for regaining power. The links continued to flourish even today. How was it that Farooq and Mohammad Shafi got more votes in the recent RS polls than the coalition had assured them, he wondered. He said Farooq had “begged” BJP leaders LK Advani, Rajnath Singh and Arun Jaitley to have one of the BJP members in the state Assembly to vote for him to make him secure. Similarly, one JKNPP member had voted for Mohammad Shafi, he said. The elections to the Jammu Municipal Corporation provided even more evidence of an active alliance between the BJP and the NC, the spokesman said. “How is it that the BJP, being in minority in the MC, and the NC having just six members got their candidates elected as Mayor and Deputy Mayor, respectively”, the spokesman asked. He said it was sad that Soz had failed to understand the tactics of his partner. He should realise the underhand means and subterfuge employed by the NC to get Vijay Bakaya elected. The spokesman said Farooq Abdullah had no moral authority to question the PDP decision to support the JKNPP, which was a partner of the previous coalition headed by Mufti Mohammad Sayed.

Death of Medico in Himachal

Kashmiri Pand its seek severe punishment

Tribune News Service Jammu, March 10

Shell-shocked by the death of 19-year-old Aman Kachroo, a first-year student of Dr Rajendra Prasad Government Medical College in Tanda, Himachal Pradesh, the Kashmiri Pandit community has demanded punishment to the four accused. Aman Kachroo of Jammu fell victim to the menace of ragging by four drunken seniors, including an intern of the medical college. Describing it as a heinous crime, Panun Kashmir convener Agnishekhar demanded exemplary punishment to the perpetrators of brutal murder. Not only this, severest of the severe action should also be taken against the college authorities, he said, adding that the college authorities, which were supposed to be the guardians and sentinels of the students, could not go scot-free. In this case the college authorities completely failed to protect the life of a budding doctor despite the fact that there are strict guidelines by the Indian Medical Association and the Supreme Court decree on the menace of ragging, he said. The financial aid and even affiliation of the college can be cancelled on this issue, which has sent shivers down the spine of entire community, he added. We shall be revealing our next course of action after meeting members of our chapter in Himachal Pradesh, said Dr Agnishekhar. Pyare Lal Raina, who lost his young son to militancy, saw no difference between militants and the four seniors responsible for snuffing out Aman’s life. Sunita Dhar, a banker, said her son was also pursuing MBBS course from Bangalore and this incident had shocked her.

LS Poll: Cong, NC candidates soon

Tribune News Service Srinagar, March 10

The coordination committee of the Congress and the NC is expected to come out with its list of candidates for the six Lok Sabha seats in a day or two. This will set the stage for the forthcoming general elections in the state. The forthcoming elections will also be a testing time for the coalition partners, particularly in the Kashmir valley, where separatist organisations are once again geared up to enforce a boycott. If the Assembly elections were held in the aftermath of the two-month-long Amarnath land row, the Lok Sabha elections ahead would be looked through the situation arising out of the killings during the past couple of months since Omar Abdullah took over. Two persons were killed allegedly by the Army at Bomai near Sopore, while a kin of JKLF chairman Yasin Malik died under mysterious circumstances here recently, triggering a fresh spate of protests. The mainstream parties, the NC and its ally Congress and the opposition parties, including the PDP and the BJP, are working out candidatures. The coordination committee of the NC and the Congress under the chairmanship of PCC chief and Union Minister for Water Resources Saifuddin Soz already had a series of meetings in Srinagar and Jammu. Sources said here that out of the six Lok Sabha constituencies in the state, each party would be contesting on three seats. While the NC would be contesting all three seats of Srinagar, Baramulla and Anantnag, the Congress would field its candidates on the remaining three seats, Jammu and Udhampur from the Jammu region and Ladakh.

BCs rue govt apathy

Tribune News Service Jammu, March 10

The Backward Classes Democratic Party expressed annoyance over the neglecting attitude of the state government towards this community and their rights. This was disclosed by party president Sheraz Ahmed Azhari in a press conference held here today. Azhari said, “The behaviour of the state government is not good towards the poor and downtrodden people. So in order to protect our constitutional rights, we will fight parliamentary elections on all six seats.” He further said after coming in Parliament, they would struggle for their pending demands like implementation of the Mandal Commission report for 27 per cent of reservation for the Backward Classes. He demanded that a State Advisory Board should be constituted immediately to safeguard the interests of the Backward Classes, as this community constitutes 70 per cent of the population.

Garbage, choked drains Mazdoor Basti’s bane

Sunaina Kaul

Tribune News Service Jammu, March 10

Unhygienic conditions in densely populated Mazdoor Basti of Reshamgarh colony exposes the inability of the municipal authorities to provide basic amenities to people. Garbage littered on the main road and the dilapidated condition of lanes and drains in the locality have made life difficult for the residents. The sewerage is choked with polythene bags, rags, plastic remains. Foul smell emanating from the drains and garbage accumulated on the road have made walking through the area a horrible experience. The municipal authorities have not placed any dustbin in the locality for the disposal of waste. The residents rue that the waste disposed of by Government Medical College, Bakshi Nagar, and SMGS Hospital into the main drain, which passes through this colony, poses a serious health hazard to them. They complain that the drain has not been cleaned for a long period. “It has become a breeding ground for rats, flies and mosquitoes, thus creating health problems for the residents,” avers Pawan Sharma, president of the Social Welfare Committee of the area. Sharma adds the concrete walls on both sides of the drain are broken and stink emanating from the polluted water accumulated in the drain has made the lives of people miserable.

Repair of road to Baba Ghulam shrine begins

Tribune News Service Shahdara Sharief (Rajouri), March 10

Finally, the government has started repairing the road to the shrine of Baba Ghulam Shah Badshah here. Due to the dilapidated condition of the road, not only locals are suffering but also thousands of pilgrims who visit the shrine. Four years back, the government had undertook repair and upgrade of the road to the shrine. However, half of the work on the road hasn’t been completed yet. Residents, who are heaving a sigh of relief after work began on the ill-maintained road, told The Tribune that the government had started the repair work on this 6.4-km-long road four years ago, but it was taken up just for a couple of days in a year. They added that since the repair work was going on at a snail’s pace, this had led to deterioration of the road. “We are hoping that now the work on the road will continue till it is fully repaired ,” hoped Afzal Khan, a local resident. In 2004, the then Chief Minister, Mufti Muhammad Sayeed, got work started to upgrade this road through the PWD. Four years have gone by but less than half of the work only has been completed. Even the shrine management hopes that the work will be completed soon. A PWD officer told The Tribune: “We have been told to complete the first 4 km from Thanamandi by March 31. The rest of the road will be probably completed by October-end.”

Tibetans observe uprising day

Our Correspondent Leh, March 10

Tibetans living in Ladakh celebrated the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan National Uprising Day here today. To mark the occasion, peaceful procession was held in Leh. Starting from Skatsang, Tibetans prayed for peace while holding the portrait of the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan national flag, gathered at Polo Ground where the main function was held. Silence was also observed to pay homage to the the martyrs of Tibet. The Tibetan Youth Congress president said, “This year, we also mark the 50th anniversary of the Dalia Lama’s and the Tibetan government’s escape in to exile. To recognise the significance of our 50 years in exile, the Tibetan Youth Congress proposing to conduct comprehensive review of the past 50 years of Tibet’s struggle for independence. On March 10, 1959, thousands of Tibetans rose up against the Chinese occupation to national identity and continuously demanding in unison for an independence of Tibet, return of the Dalia Lama to Tibet and release of Panchen Lama.

Militants kill sarpanch in Reasi

Tribune News Service Udhampur, March 10

Militants shot dead Noor Hussain, sarpanch of Lunchha village, in the Mahore area of Reasi district yesterday. A senior police official said two militants entered the house of Noor Hussain and called him out. As he came out, militants shot at him. The police said the gunmen fired several rounds of fire injuring Noor severely. The injured was immediately shifted to the hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. The police sources said Noor was receiving threats from the militants as he was opposing their inhuman act. Killing of a village sarpanch has sent a wave of terror in this belt where militants have been desperately trying to consolidate their positions. A large number of families have already taken shelter at Talwara in Reasi due to threats of militants.

Illicit liquor seized

Tribune News Service Udhampur, March 10

With the arrest of six persons, the police has busted a gang which was involved in smuggling liquor in the town. Selling of liquor is strictly banned in Katra - the base camp of Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine. At least 225 pouches of country-made liquor were seized from the possession of sumgglers, who were travelling in a Bolera car. The accused have been identified as Mangal Choudhary, Kewal Krishan, Madan Lal, Mohammad Qayoom, Liqual Ali and Raj Kumar. SP, Katra, Ashok Sharma said on a specific information, the police had deputed teams on the Painthal road to arrest the smugglers. During the routine checking, the police intercepted a Bolera car on the Painthal-Serli road and seized liquor from occupants of the vehicle. The accused have reportedly purchased the pouches from Udhampur and were trying to smuggle in the same in Katra.

Jawan held with ammo Jammu, March 10

A day after an Army jawan fled with three rifles and ammunition to join the Lashker-e-Taiba (LeT), another jawan was arrested at the local railway station with cartridges. During checking and scanning of luggage at the railway station yesterday, the police seized 20 rounds of SLR and five rounds of INSAS rifle. The jawan has been identified as Sanjay Singh of an ASC battalion at Srinagar. He was later handed over to the military police. — PTI

IT survey yields Rs 1.5 crore

Tribune News Service Jammu, March 10

After the Income Tax Department conducted simultaneous surveys in three premises of Rakesh Jewellers, the latter today surrendered an unaccounted income of Rs 1.50 crore, IT Commissioner Virender Singh said. The IT survey at three premises of Rakesh Jewellers in Lakhdatta Bazar and Apsara Road in Gandhi Nagar here continued till late last night. Such surveys would continue till month-end in the temple city.

New state JD(U) chief

Tribune News Service Jammu, March 10

The Pradesh Janata Dal (United) has appointed Inder Mohinder Tar Singh as president of the party. Addressing the convention held at Sei in RS Pura today, Tar Singh promised to do his best for strengthening the party base in the state. Hari Singh, who contested elections from Suchetgarh as an Independent candidate, joined the party along with his supporters.

MLC feted Jammu, March 10

The Panthers Party organised a reception for its chairman Bhim Singh and newly elected member of the Legislative Council Syed Rafiq Shah, who won with the highest margin as 31 MLAs voted for Rafiq Shah. Prof Bhim Singh urged the Election Commission to restrain the government from blackmailing the J&K police in the name of recruitment after the code of conduct came into force. — TNS