Jammu Chib for collective efforts of people, govt to maintain public utilities KT NEWS SERVICE JAMMU, JULY 11- Tightening noose around the executing agencies and hospital administration for their dilly-dally approach, Minister for Medical and Technical Education, Prof. R.S. Chib today warned them of stringent action if they fail to step up their efforts for proper functioning and timely completion of ongoing construction works in SMGS.



During a surprise inspection of the hospital here today, the Minister took serious notice of unhygienic and poor canteen services besides lack of proper sanitation in the hospital.



“A healthy institution is supposed to be a place where an ailing gets complete hygienic and healthy atmosphere for his or her early recovery”, the Minister maintained while directing the principal to issue showcause notice asking contractor why these dilapidated and unhealthy canteens in the hospital premises not to be closed. He also held the hospital management responsible for mismanagement in the hospital at certain levels which not only jeopardizes the efforts of the government of extending enhanced medicare to people but also defames this noble profession and the fraternity as well.



Chib said that proper health and hygiene in a hospital can be maintained only when all concerned contribute their part voluntarily. “It should be a joint venture of the people, hospital administration and other associated agencies to make a health institution healthy which is pre-requisite for health of a patient”, he added. He appealed the people to take care of all such institutions, providing vital services to them, like their own property as any flaw in these will ultimately harm the society itself.



During his visit to various wards and units, the Minister expressed dismay over improper functioning of various vital services like fans, coolers and dilapidated toilets and directed the concerned to immediately correct the faults. He also interacted with the patients in the pediatric ward and enquired about the services being provided to them in the hospital.



In view of need for certain repair and renovation works in the hospital, the Minister directed the concerned authorities to formulate a project proposal and local submit the same for funding. He also asked the Medical Superintendent and Deputy Superintendent to take daily round of every unit of the hospital for further streamlining the functioning of the health institution.



The Minister also asked the doctors to check whether the patients from far-off and remote areas have BPL cards so that they could be provided free diagnostic services.





News Updated at : Thursday, July 12, 2012 Comment on this Story

Top Stories of the Day Talks only way forward: Omar SRINAGAR, JUL 11: The Chief Minister Omar Abdullah here today said dialogue between New Delhi and Islamabad is the only way out to find solution to Kashmir issue and stressed that both India and Pakistan should work towards resolving smaller issue to build confidence. “We are aware that bigger issues can’t be settled in just few meetings, therefore we would emphasize on the need for certain result-oriented immediate measures to address smaller issues like strengthening of cross LoC trade by co > School bus skids, falls in gorge > Swami Ashok calls on Malik, Mirwaiz > VC JU compliments ASC for improvement in All India Ranking > 6 more pilgrims die; toll rises to 67 > Gandhi not formally conferred `Father of the Nation’ title Other Stories from Web News from e-generator.com