Home > World News > Article Friday June 14, 2002

news

national

world

opinion

business technology sport entertainment classifieds

jobs

property

cars

place an ad



extra

personal finance

travel

education



subscribe

home delivery

eNewsletter



archives



today's edition: am

past 10 days



site guide





Rumsfeld offers US technology to guard Kashmir border June 14 2002



Border ritual ... Indian soldiers carry the national flag after the daily lowering ceremony at the village of Wagah, which sits on the only road crossing between India and Pakistan. Photo: AFP/Dibyangshu Sarkar Srinagar: The United States Secretary of Defence, Donald Rumsfeld, has proposed using high-tech ground sensors along the Line of Control that divides Indian and Pakistani Kashmir, to prevent infiltration by militants. The offer of US technology came as Mr Rumsfeld backed India's claims that al-Qaeda militants were probably operating in Kashmir, although he could offer no proof. India's junior Foreign Minister, Omar Abdullah, said Mr Rumsfeld's acknowledgement of possible al-Qaeda operations in Kashmir was a "very important development for India" but he rejected suggestions that foreign monitors be used in the state. "Our troops are well capable of dealing with the situation themselves, and there is absolutely no possibility of foreign troops operating in any territory in India," Mr Abdullah said. Mr Rumsfeld, speaking after talks with Indian leaders in New Delhi, said: "I have seen indications that there are al-Qaeda operating near the Line of Control, but I do not have hard evidence of precisely how many or who or where."

");document.write(" advertisement

Mr Rumsfeld did not say on which side of the line al-Qaeda fighters were believed to be operating. When asked if US forces would take the hunt for them into Kashmir, he did not answer the question directly but praised Pakistan's help.

"Specifically, in the case of al-Qaeda in Pakistan, the Pakistan Government has been very co-operative with the United States in helping to locate and, in a number of instances, they have actually captured al-Qaeda and turned them over to us, which has been a very helpful thing."

A source at the Indian Defence Ministry has said Indian forces shot dead two heavily armed al-Qaeda fighters on Sunday.

"There are reports of two groups of al-Qaeda having sneaked in, but that needs to be confirmed," said Rajinder Bhullar, the Kashmir intelligence chief of India's paramilitary Border Security Force.

The groups comprised 40 to 50 men in northern and central Kashmir, and they had been heard speaking Arabic, he said.

Referring to the use of US technology to help monitor the situation, Mr Rumsfeld said: "Needless to say the goal is to see that there is not infiltration across the Line of Control and that there are not terrorist acts."

Mr Rumsfeld's support for the al-Qaeda reports angered Pakistan, where the presidential spokesman, Rashid Qureshi, said: "I don't know where they got this from. It seems they believed Indian propaganda."

Mr Rumsfeld later flew to Islamabad, where he said on arrival that he had brought "some ideas" to try to defuse tensions.





Indian diplomatic sources told CNN that US and Indian officials had reached an agreement in principle for "sharing and evaluating intelligence inputs in a more organised way" across the Line of Control.

Agence France-Presse; The Telegraph, London

Printer friendly version Email to a friend