Rajneesh Kumar, a Home Ministry spokesman, said by telephone: "Our security agencies are looking into this claim to establish how credible it is. We take this kind of thing very seriously because it is a matter of concern to the nation at large. We are doing what it takes to verify this."

A senior intelligence official in Kashmir said officers were trying to trace the call, made over a local landline to Kashmir's Current News Service. "Our immediate effort is to locate the caller and ascertain the authenticity of the claim," the official told The AP on condition of anonymity.

The caller, who identified himself as Abu al-Hadeed, was reported to have declared: "Whosoever has carried out the attacks in Bombay, we express our gratitude and happiness."

The police rounded up about 350 people in Mumbai, also known as Bombay, late Wednesday and Thursday in connection with the attacks, although most were released. Officers said many of those held were "antisocial elements" known to the police who were interrogated for any insights they might have into the groups behind the blasts.

The Maharashtra state government said it was offering a reward of 2.5 million rupees, or $54,250, for information about suspects.

Relatives of some of the victims were still visiting the city's hospitals and morgues, trying to identify the bodies of their family members by examining personal belongings and items of clothing. The police said that about 158 of the dead had been identified.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

India and Pakistan were at pains to stop the peace process from being seriously damaged by mutual recriminations in the wake of the attacks.

Delicate relations between the two nuclear neighbors were strained in the immediate aftermath of the attacks by a furious exchange of words between officials at the foreign ministries in both countries.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Although Pakistan's leaders were swift to condemn the attacks, and India's senior leadership has been careful not to make any public statements of accusation, there was a hardening of public opinion in India toward Pakistan.

A number of newspaper editorials called on the government to toughen its stance toward Islamabad.

The first salvo came hours after the explosions when Foreign Minister Khurshid Mahmood Kasuri of Pakistan said India should be careful about trying to attribute the attacks to Pakistan- based militants and went on to suggest that terrorist acts against India would end if India settled its dispute over Kashmir with Pakistan. Solving the Kashmir issue "is the best way of tackling extremism in South Asia," he told an audience at the Carnegie Endowment for Peace in Washington.

India's Foreign Ministry condemned Kasuri's remarks as "appalling." India is sensitive to any suggestion that it should make concessions on Kashmir before Pakistan takes stronger action against extremist activity within its borders.

The Indian Foreign Ministry spokesman Navtej Sarna called on Pakistan to crack down on militant groups.

"We would urge Pakistan to take urgent steps to dismantle the infrastructure of terrorism on the territory under its control and act resolutely against individuals and groups who are responsible for terrorists' violence," he said.

"We find it appalling that Kasuri should seek to link this blatant and inhuman act of terrorism against men, women and children to the so-called lack of resolution of dispute between India and Pakistan," Sarna told reporters.

In a televised address to the Indian nation, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was careful not to issue any rebuke, or even mention, Pakistan. The government's official line has been to insist that "the peace process must go on."