Kashmir: Higher Voter Turnout, What Does It Speak of ?

By Suhail Qasim Mir

04 December, 2014

Countercurrents.org

The highly overwhelming voter turnout in the first 2 phases of Legislative Assembly elections in J&K has sparked off a new debate. There are many arguments and counter arguments. Among other things that have been said, Indian intelligentsia is of the opinion that the higher turnout is a severe setback for the separatists. They argue that the phenomenal turnout has proven that Kashmir has reaffirmed its faith in democracy and Kashmiris have embraced the Indian Nationhood. Prime Minister, Narendra Modi called it victory of ballot over bullet. However, the optimism of Indian intellectuals and academia on the position of Kashmir is gravely misplaced.

There are many flaws to their argument. One, it is too early to jump to the conclusions when just 2 phases of the five-phase election process have passed. Second, the people have voted in higher numbers because they seek an end to their day to day problems. People say that they voted because they want to put in place a responsible government which would resolve their daily ordeals. Exercise of ballot is for better governance and for the problems of bijli, sadak and pani to end. The higher turnout can’t be taken as a certificate that people of valley want to integrate with India. It would be foolish to conclude that Azaadi sentiment has died in them.

Ever since its inception, Kashmir issue has been a serious threat to the stability of South Asia and continues to be a turbulence epicentre today as well. India ironically has always adopted an escape route and has always tried to sweep such an obvious issue under the rug. Instead of admitting that there is a problem which needs an immediate resolution, India is trying to protect its mistaken belief that Kashmir is an integral part of India. To uphold its claim, India always seeks to publicize the things that reassure its mistaken belief. The same is being done again this time by manipulating the higher voter turnout. An attempt is being made by India to colour the picture in its own favour.

People may have different reasons which prompted them to vote but it is never that the spirit of freedom has diluted in them. The reasons are far-off from that. I happened to talk to a number of people on the issue of voting and elections in the valley. Farooq Ahmad Rather, a registered voter in Bijbehara Constituency has his own reasons for casting the vote. He said,

“I intend to cast my vote on 14th December (Bijbehara polling date) even if that means braving inclement weather and standing in the queue for hours together. I would vote for PDP because they are most likely to start the operations of much delayed Fruit mandi in Bijbehara. I’m a fruit grower and the non-availability of a nearby fruit market costs me in terms of high fare and less priced fruit which gets bruised by the time it reaches far-off market. If the mandi is started here, it will save me the freight costs, besides the fresh fruit will fetch me more money.”

Another person, Bilal Ahmad, a research scholar at Kashmir University said that he would vote to make sure that BJP doesn’t come to power in the state. He said,

“I’ve never casted a vote before, but this time I will. I don’t want BJP to form government in the state. Just before this election a large number of migrant Pandits have flocked in the valley, who are obviously going to vote for BJP. So, to negate the influence of Pandits I’ll go out and vote for any local party. If BJP manages to win, they won’t only deprive the Kashmiri people of their freedom but would base itself on the exploitation of the masses, and would ruin Kashmir economically, culturally and spiritually.”

The justifications of people for casting their ballot are fair as they seek better governance and bureaucracy to redress their daily problems. During the provincial elections in British-India in 1937 and 1946, people of India who were desperate to win freedom from British went ahead and exercised their franchise. In spite of their grave abhorrence towards the British rule, people voted to put in place a government system which would address their grievances. It didn’t mean people of India embraced the British rule but they saw voting as a resolution to their day to day problems. Same is the case with Kashmir. A higher voter turnout isn’t a testimony of sway in the desires of Kashmiris. It doesn’t mean Kashmir has embraced the idea of integration. It rather means putting in place a very responsible, transparent and accountable administration to mark a journey towards development. However, labelling higher turnout as wish of Kashmir to integrate with India is not affordable. The issue is still there and needs to be resolved in a very holistic and systematic manner. The solution can be procrastinated upto infinity, till then the problem continues…….

Suhail Qasim Mir, is an Alumnus, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi. Email: suhailmir24@gmail.com

.









