An operational leader of Lashkar, Zaki ur-Rehman Lakhvi, is also said to be cooperating with investigators. News of Mr. Shah’s confession was reported by The Wall Street Journal.

“These guys showed no remorse,” said the Pakistani official. “They were bragging. They didn’t need to be pushed, tortured or waterboarded” into making their statements.

The confessions made no mention of any involvement by the Pakistani government, said the official, who added, "They talk about people acting on their own.”

Though Pakistani authorities announced that the men had been detained in the first week of December, the official declined to say how long it took for them to confess their role in the Mumbai siege. The official also declined to specify how many confessions had been obtained, and said, “It’s not just one confession.”

The details of which security officials were carrying out the interrogations, where the suspects were being detained and whether they faced any charges all remained murky, and other Pakistani officials declined to discuss the matter or to confirm the Pakistani official’s account.

Photo

A government spokesman deflected direct questions about Pakistani complicity in the attacks and about the confessions by Lashkar members. “The idea that a person has spilled the beans while India has not even shared evidence with us seems far-fetched,” said Farhatullah Babar, a spokesman for President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan.

But Indian officials and other skeptics are sure to question how seriously interrogations by Pakistani security officials could be expected to examine any possible role by the ISI in the attacks.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

American intelligence officials say they believe that links remain between Lashkar and the ISI, and that the spy agency has helped support the militant group for the past several years by sharing intelligence and providing protection.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But American officials say they also believe that the spy agency has become more careful to mask its ties with militants since this summer, when American officials accused the spy agency of involvement in the bombing of the Indian Embassy in Afghanistan.

One Lashkar fighter who left the group several years ago said in an interview that the agency was directly involved in planning operations in the disputed Kashmir region. The agency’s officers were “at the table” as missions were being sketched out, the former Lashkar fighter said.

However, an active member of Lashkar said in an interview that relations with Pakistani security forces had grown cold. “We always had to hide from the Indian military, but now we have to hide from the Pakistani military as well,” he said.

The ISI has always been a powerful and semiautonomous agency, and its top officers have maintained strong links to Islamist militants. There is some hope that the appointment three months ago of a new spy chief, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, who previously oversaw military operations against militants in Pakistan’s lawless western districts, signaled a move away from sympathies with the Islamist fighters who control much of the region bordering Afghanistan.

Mr. Zardari told President Bush during a telephone call on Wednesday that his government would “not allow its territory to be used by nonstate actors for launching attacks on other countries” and that “anybody found involved in such attacks from the soil of Pakistan will be dealt with sternly,” according to Pakistan’s state news agency.

Despite the official assurances, some Pakistani officials appeared open to the idea that Pakistani militants carried out the operation. Mahmud Ali Durrani, the national security adviser, said in an interview broadcast on Tuesday that it “could be” that some or all of the Mumbai attackers were Pakistanis.

One reason that Indian government officials have refused to provide substantive evidence so far, the Pakistani official said, is because they “are scared their intelligence methods will be discovered” by their Pakistani rivals.

Indian officials have shared evidence with the United States and certain other governments, but they have not permitted that information to be shared with Pakistan, said one Western official.