Mustafa Kamal, brother of Union Minister Farooq Abdullah, on Sunday blamed security forces, former Jammu and Kashmir governor Jagmohan and PDP leader Mufti Sayeed for forcing the migration of Kashmiri Pandits from the Valley.

The statement comes two days after Abdullah sought the forgiveness of Kashmiri Pandits for their "exodus" and "ethnic cleansing" from the Valley in early 1990, and shows signs of rumblings within the family deepening by the day.

"It was the government which forced Kashmiri Pandits to flee Valley. It was Army, governor Jagmohan and PDP leader Mufti Sayeed who played a role in this," Kamal, who was health minister in the previous NC government, told The Indian Express.

"Isn't it true that official vehicles were pressed into service to evacuate Pandits from the Valley and escort them to Jammu and other parts of the state. I will tell you that Jagmohan did it so that he has a free hand in dealing with Muslim majority in Valley".

Interestingly, Kamal said that the eruption of militancy in the state in 1989 was also an inside job and not a result of Pakistan's interference.

"Militancy did not come from across the border. It was born in the Valley, deliberately promoted by the Central government to dislodge NC from power. They couldn't do it through election, so they did it through militancy," Kamal said.

He said effort was also made to drag in his brother-in-law (former chief minister G M Shah) into the plan but he refused. "I know from reliable sources how borders were opened at certain places against certain amounts. And among the 135 militant outfits, around 35 were sponsored by the government".

When pointed out that Abdullah had sought the forgiveness of Pandits on behalf of the Muslims, Kamal said Abdullah's apology was only for the sufferings of the Pandit community and not for what had happened to them in the Valley. "People in the Valley are not responsible for this, the government and the security machinery is," Kamal said.

... contd.

Please read our terms of use before posting comments