Front Page | Previous Terrorism to feature in talks with Kofi Annan By Our Special Correspondent NEW DELHI, MARCH 9. India is expected to raise developments in Afghanistan, international terrorism and the expansion of the United Nations Security Council during the visit of the U.N. Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, next week. Mr. Annan will visit India for three days from March 15 as part of his South Asia tour. Prior to his trip to India, he is slated to visit Pakistan, Nepal and Bangladesh. According to a spokesman of the Ministry of External Affairs, India is expected to raise the subject of international terrorism with Mr. Annan. New Delhi's draft comprehensive convention on terrorism is finding wide support among the U.N. members. India is also a signatory to the convention, sponsored by France, on the financing of international terrorism in the U.N. General Assembly. Developments in Afghanistan, especially in the wake of the destruction of the Bamiyan statues by the Taliban, are expected to be discussed. India, along with the U.S and Russia, has co- sponsored the resolution on sanctions against the Taliban. The developments in Bamiyan, according to analysts, are likely to reinforce the Indian stand which advocates stringent economic and political restrictions. India has also made its position on Afghanistan explicit during earlier discussions with the U.N. special envoy on Afghanistan, Mr. Frances Vendrell. Both sides are also excepted to discuss U.N. peacekeeping operations. In fact, Mr. Annan will visit the Rajputana Rifles centre, where Indian troops bound for peacekeeping missions, are acquainted with their responsibilities and obligations. He will later deliver a talk on peacekeeping at the United Services Institution. During his stay, Mr. Annan will meet the Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee, and the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh. While in the capital, he will address the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry. Mr. Annan, who visits Hyderabad on March 17, will address the Confederation of Indian Industry there. Militant groups disappointed with Annan By B. Muralidhar Reddy ISLAMABAD, MARCH 9. The Pakistan-based militant groups and organisations operating in Kashmir have expressed disappointment over reports that the United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, has no plans to meet representatives of their outfits in the course of his visit to the sub-continent beginning tomorrow. While the United Jehadi Council (UJC), a conglomerate of militant outfits, said it had no hopes from Mr. Annan's visit, the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front chairman, Mr. Amanullah Khan, expressed `anguish' over reports that Mr. Annan had no programme of meeting the Kashmiri leadership. The militant outfits are particularly peeved at the fact that while Mr. Annan has time to pay a visit to the Afghan refugee camps in the North West Frontier Province, he has no plan to visit the Kashmir refugee camps in the Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. In a statement here, the UJC, led by the Hizb-ul- Mujahideen chief, Syed Salahuddin, said the United Nations had lost all its credibility in the eyes of the Kashmiris as it had failed to implement its long-standing resolutions on Kashmir. ``If the U.N. wants to revive its credibility, then it should practically intervene in Kashmir as it did in Iraq and East Timor and force India to get out of Kashmir. The Kashmiri people have totally lost confidence in this world organisation because of its criminal negligence and apathy about seeking a solution to the Kashmir dispute.'' In a separate statement, the JKLF chairman regretted that Mr. Annan had no plans to meet the Kashmiri leaders and maintained that as per the U.N. Charter, it was his bounden duty to resolve the Kashmir dispute. Kashmir posed the greatest danger to world peace with two nuclear powers' - India and Pakistan - daggers drawn on the conflict. The dispute had caused 80,000 deaths and it was the duty of Mr. Annan to resolve the dispute. ``It was therefore imperative for the U.N. Secretary-General, in the interests of international peace, if not to save South Asia from a probable catastrophe, to do all he and the world body could do to avoid that catastrophe,'' the statement said. Send this article to Friends by E-Mail