Dr. Syed Nazir Gilani

Chairman of Kashmir Committee, Ram Jethmalani (Prominent lawyer and former union minister) in his interaction with Kashmir press on Saturday 08 November 2014 in Srinagar touched a number of subjects on Kashmiri politics, namely, separatists, Plebiscite, article 370, Musharraf formula and the killing of two youth by Indian security forces in Chattergam.

According to his understanding the Plebiscite has already taken place in Jammu and Kashmir. He stated, “The constitution of this state was not formulated by the constituent assembly of India, but by its constituent assembly itself. That was a plebiscite. It is the constituent assembly of J&K which incorporated some provisions of the Indian Constitution. The plebiscite has therefore taken place. You are not living under the constitution of India but under the constitution which was framed by the constituent assembly which has willingly accepted a part of the Indian constitution.”

He made a reference to Sir Owen Dickson’s conclusion that plebiscite is no longer a feasible proposition on Kashmir, UN order for plebiscite, plebiscite under Indian flag, vacation of last intruder from Pakistan, demographic character of J&K and pro Pakistan and pro India character of separatists. It is not possible to address all these matters in this column and I would therefore restrain myself to the reference that “The plebiscite has therefore taken place.”

There is no denying the fact that Ram Jethmalani is highly knowledgeable person and has the courage to look over and above the shoulder and lengths of the shadow of secularism and seek to have an opinion on Kashmir, not through the A4 size pile of files but by visiting and interacting with people in Kashmir Valley. However, the limits of these VIP visits to Kashmir remain unreliable because these visits end up within a few streets of Srinagar. Majority of Indians have yet to discover Kashmir, beyond the few streets of Srinagar. One could safely say that the common Indian has no clue about Kashmir except a stereotype that the majority of these Muslims are “Pakistani agents”, “terrorists” and anti-India.

Ram Jethmalani is an important voice and a jurist. One has to be open to the argument that there are other juridical opinions on the question of Kashmir and another most important voice is the late justice V M Tarkunde of Bombay High Court. He continued to hold a different opinion on Plebiscite. Both are important Indians and have tried to free the Kashmiri Muslim from the A4 size files held on them by the Delhi administration since 27 October 1947. Therefore, it is safe to say that Ram Jethmalani’s views important though they are, do not complete the circle of wisdom on Kashmir. On the point that Plebiscite has already taken place, Ram Jethmalani has erred in our disfavour and in the favour of Indian approach, as a lawyer does at the end of his submissions for his client.

It is true that people of Kashmir are “not living under the constitution of India but under the constitution which was framed by the constituent assembly”, but it is debatable that “the constituent assembly has willingly accepted a part of the Indian constitution”. The Constituent Assembly established in September 1953 has many problems of “competence”. Its proceedings have been challenged by Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah in his letter dated 16 August 1956 written from Sub Jail Kud and addressed to The President of Constituent Assembly at Srinagar (G M Sadiq). Sheikh Abdullah addressed the first meeting of the Constituent Assembly on 5 November 1951 and was deposed as the prime minister of Kashmir on 9 August 1953 and lodged in Sub Jail Kud. He was denied his request to defend a vote of no confidence which was going to be brought against him and challenge a vote of confidence being sought in favour of the new leader in the assembly.

The Constituent Assembly that Ram Jethmalani has accredited is in fact seriously discredited by popular memory of the time and in particular by Sheikh Abdullah in his letter as, “With the coup of 9th August 53, the first act of murder of democracy was committed when I was unconstitutionally and illegally removed from Premiership and simultaneously arrested and detained. This arbitrary removal from office of the Leader of the House, without a formal vote of no-confidence is without a parallel in democracy and spontaneous mass protests from every nook and corner of Kashmir have registered an unequivocal condemnation against it. The Government pitchforked into office in consequence of this coup, therefore, does not and cannot enjoy even the semblance of public confidence. Beyond doubt it would have tottered and collapsed soon after its inception, but for wanton and widespread repression let loose by army, Indian Reserve Police, the Militia and other forces”.

Sheikh Abdullah who had earlier defended the admission of Indian army into the State at the UN Security Council in February 1948, has recorded a different experience in his letter, stating “These agencies of brute force indulged in “shoot at sight” for long after 9th August and it is they, since reinforced by the special Police and gangsters of Peace Brigade, which sustain the present regime in office”.

Ram Jethmalani is a democrat and if he has missed the written evidence surrounding the calling of the Constituent Assembly of J & K, needs to be confronted with the evidence as it stands in the said letter of imprisoned Sheikh addressed to President of the Constituent Assembly, “What followed 9th August is not unknown to you unless you find it convenient to forget. It is history now that promiscuous shooting took a heavy toll of peaceful men, women and children throughout the country, thousands of people were arrested and tortured in order to break them into submission. The victims included high government officials, respectable citizens, lawyers of high status, members of assembly and many freedom fighters of our movement. When these third degree methods could not coerce them, the victims with bruised and broken limbs were whisked off to various prisons in the State. The number of those detained under house arrest at Minister’s residences, in so called hotels and other private buildings is legion and their tales of torture are equally heart-rending”. This blood curdling drama went on for long unabashed and unabated. Kashmir was made a veritable hell and an iron curtain was thrown over the Valley, suppressing all facts from the outside world”.

Sheikh Abdullah questions the legitimacy of calling the session of the Constituent Assembly and writes, “In these circumstances you convened a session of the Assembly in order to seek a vote of confidence for the new Government headed by Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad who was the chief actor in the bloody drama of August 53 with you as the main collaborator”. These are the shades of evidence within Valley that discredit the Ram Jethmalani’s stand on the Constituent Assembly of J & K.

There are many other important facts that have been either glossed over in mistake or may be it has been a deliberate attempt of Indian school of opinion to conceal the other factors that the Constituent Assembly, prior to staging the arrest of Sheikh Abdullah had agreed to discuss. The most important written piece of evidence in the Sheikh’s other letter dated 26 September 1956 from Sub Jail Kud to the President of the Constituent Assembly is the reproduction of the minutes of the National Conference Working Committee meeting held on 9th June 1953, prior to Sheik’s arrest in August 1953. He writes, “As a result of the discussion held in the course of various meetings, the following proposals only emerge as possible alternatives for an honourable and peaceful solution of the Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan:

(a) Overall Plebiscite with conditions as detailed in the minutes of the meeting dated 4.6.53

(b) Independence of the whole State

(c) Independence of the whole State with joint control of foreign affairs and defence

(d) Dixon plan with independence for the plebiscite area.

Even if one agrees (which one should not) to the argument that Constituent Assembly has taken a decision in favour of Indian Constitution, it is disproved from the records as a true narration. President of the Constituent Assembly (G M Sadiq) in his reply on 11 September 1956 to Sheikh Abdullah writes, “In the light of these observations I think that the problem has only one solution under the existing circumstances, and that is to finalise the accession of the State to India on a limited basis as already agreed upon between the people of India and those of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, represented on the one hand by the Parliament of India and on the other, by the Constituent Assembly of the State”.

Ram Jethmalani has missed on the competence of this Constituent Assembly. It did not represent all the people of the State of Jammu and Kashmir (aka “Jammu Kashmir, Aksai Tibet & Allied”). The people living in the two administrations on the Pakistani side of cease fire line were not represented in the Constituent Assembly, and its claim that it represented the State as defined in article 4 of the J & K Constitution is false.

In fact India has made a foul start through an act of murder of democracy and unconstitutionally and illegally removing the Prime Minister of Kashmir and lodging him in jail. In addition to lack of competence and lack of representation the J & K Government and National Conference had been placed under a caution of the UN Security Council from 30 March 1951. UN Security Council Resolution of 30 March 1951 [91(1951) – S/2017/Rev.1] has warned the National Conference that the convening a constituent assembly would be of no consequence because, “the area from which such a constituent assembly would be elected is only a part of the whole territory of Jammu and Kashmir”. The UN Security Council Resolution has further reminded the Governments and authorities concerned of the principles agreed by the UN that, “the final disposition of the State of Jammu and Kashmir will be made in accordance with the will of the people expressed through the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the United Nations”.

The UN Resolution has further cautioned the National Conference that, “any action that assembly might attempt to take to determine the future shape and affiliation of the entire State or any part thereof would not constitute a disposition of the State in accordance with the above principle”. Therefore, no plebiscite has taken place. Any claim on the basis of any action of Constituent Assembly has no legal force.