• ‘Cong supported NC in denying Guru final meeting with family’

Sheikh Saleem

Bandipora, Nov 22: Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) patron and former Chief Minister, Mufti Mohammad Sayeed Saturday said Indian parliament does not have power to abrogate Article 370, which grants special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

“J&K acceded to Indian state under certain terms and conditions,” Mufti said while addressing an election rally in Bandipora.

Referring to Article 370, he said it cannot be abrogated.

“Even Indian Parliament does not have power to scrap Article 370, which grants special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Indian constitution,” he said adding Article 370 should be strengthened.

PDP patron said those, who are talking about abrogation of Article 370, are living in fool’s paradise. “Even Indian parliament can’t abrogate it. Only J&K Constituent Assembly of 1951 has the power to do so”.

BJP leaders have been calling for discussion and debate on Article 370 and favour scrapping of the law.

Referring to separatists, Mufti said he wants to tell people, who want Azadi, that J&K has special status within Indian constitution. “We have our own flag and constitution”.

Hitting out at Congress, he said the party supported NC in denying final meeting of Afzal Guru with his family. “The government didn’t bother to inform Guru’s family about his hanging. Guru’s body was not given to his family for proper burial”.

He said NC government defamed youth of Kashmir by labelling them as stone pelters, Ikhwanis and drug addicts. “The same youth rescued hundreds of people during floods when government was missing”.

Reacting to recent statement of BJP president Amit Shah that saffron party will integrate J&K with India, Mufti said, “Such attempts are being made since 1947. There is a need to integrate the hearts of J&K, which BJP can’t do as the saffron party is indulging in communal politics.”

“BJP is trying to divide people on religious lines and we will oppose communal politics tooth and nail. We will not allow people to divide State on religious lines and we will break walls of the hatred,” he said.

Mufti said PDP wants to make Kashmir a free economic zone, where there will be no bar on movement of people. “Kashmir was a jail since 1947 where no one was allowed to move freely but we reopened roads and bridged the gaps between two arch rival nations, India and Pakistan”.

He said he has a dream to connect J&K with Central Asia through Silk Road, which passes through the district. “If voted to power, our government will open Gilgit-Baltistan road”.

Seeking votes for local candidate Nizam ud Din Bhat for Bandipora and Yasir Reshi and Sonawari constituencies respectively, Mufti said, “If voted to power, we will bring the area on tourist map and develop tourism infrastructure in the district. During our tenure, we started work on Wullar beautification and will continue to work on it”.