Attacked from all sides: J&K leaders lash out at Modi over Article 370 comment

The BJP'S Prime ministerial nominee Narendra Modi was on Monday slammed left, right and centre by the political parties of Jammu and Kashmir for calling for a debate on Article 370.

Talking to journalists after a rally in Sopore, Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah described Article 370 as a bridge between the Centre and the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

He said the BJP's prime ministerial candidate was mixing up Article 370, which provides special status to J&K, with the state's residency law.

"My problem is not with misinformation about this (state residency or state subject) law. It will take some time to percolate across the country. My problem is with people like Modi, who knowingly or unknowingly, I don't know which (it is), seek to sort of join Article 370 with our state subject laws," he said.

The J&K chief minister said he would wait to see what the BJP's future position would be on the issue.

He claimed that the BJP was eyeing an alliance with a Kashmir-based regional party and that could be the reason behind its climbdown on Article 370.

Omar's party the National Conference often accuses the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) of having a secret understanding with the BJP. PDP president Mehbooba Mufti, however, slammed Modi for his comment.

"Those who talk about having a debate about abrogation of Article 370 are out to rake emotions and create a stir and nothing else. I must tell these forces that Article 370 is not Babri Majid that it can be demolished," Mufti told reporters at her Gupkar residence on Monday.

Statement: J&K chief minister's party the National Conference often accuses the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) of having a secret understanding with the BJP

"It is Article 370 which connects Jammu and Kashmir with India and if it is scrapped, Kashmir's accession with India automatically becomes redundant," she added.

Congress president Saifuddin Soz, who addressed a press conference in Jammu on the issue, described Modi as a confused person.

"He (Modi) doesn't know ABC of the Constitution of India. He should know it was Sardar Patel who presented Article 370 before the Constituent Assembly. If he wants to debate around the Article, let him debate it with me. Article 370 is an integral part of the Constitution of India. It cannot be abrogated," Prof. Soz said.

Sajjad Lone, the chairman of Peoples Conference, however, described Modi's assertion of debate around Article 370 as a much toned down version of the BJP.

"I think it is much more toned down version of the BJP. Having said that people who talk about removal of Article 370 are not in sync with the constitutional realities of the accession," Sajjad said.

Arun Jaitley insists there is no 'dilution' of the BJP's position on Article 370

'We will always be opposed to Article 370'

Arun Jaitley

Every word of what he (Narendra Modi) said, he referred to the background of how it (Article 370) was created. He referred to Pandit Nehru's promise that this will wither away.

He referred to the journey of Article 370 from a separate status to taking India towards separatism and then challenged people for a debate on whether it has an advantage or disadvantage.

Some wise gentlemen in your profession (the media) forget the earlier sentences and just pick up the last and say dilution of stand.

There is absolutely no dilution of stand. We always were, we always will be, opposed to Article 370. I think the CM of J&K (Omar Abdullah) stands in relation to that part of law in J&K which discriminates against daughters inheriting property if they marry outside the state. Certainly, there has been such a provision. It was struck down in 2002.

The NC government, that is Omar Abdullah's party government, strongly maintained that married daughters who marry outside the state should not get right of inheritance. And if they originally had property, they lose that property.

They went and challenged this view in the Supreme Court. And thereafter since 2004, both the PDP and the NC have been repeatedly trying to get this anti-daughter legislation back and statutory-nullify the Bill. And without going back into all these facts just because it's a part of Omar Abdullah's style to use impolite language, he can't change this history.

Let's not make a mountain out of what was not even a mole. A slip of a tongue in a given case, much is made out of it. Let those who want to fight Narendra Modi, fight him politically.

Let them not fight him through disgruntled police officers or through websites or through these kinds of tweets, which some Congress leaders periodically make.



Narendra Modi, prime ministerial candidate for the BJP, wants to have a debate over Article 370

Modi 'glad' his comments have sparked debate



Narendra Modi, whose remarks on Article 370 have sparked off a row, on Monday said he was glad that after his call for a debate on the issue, it is being widely debated among people and across TV and social media.



He again demanded a rational debate on it and other issues, including the suffering of Kashmiri pandits.



"We need rational and focused debate not only on 370 but other issues relating to J&K, including suffering of sections of J&K society," the BJP's PM pick posted on Twitter on Monday.



Seeking to reach out to Kashmiris, Modi on Sunday said: "As per the Constitution, the debate will continue on whether the Article 370 will end or remain… At least there should be a debate whether Article 370 has benefited Jammu and Kashmir or not."

Modi's comment is being seen as a significant change in the saffron party's stand on scrapping Article 370 of the Constitution.



But the BJP on Monday rejected such claims and said it stood firm on its demand that the provision giving special status to Jammu and Kashmir should be abrogated.



Supporting Modi's demand for a rational debate on Article 370, Leaders of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha Arun Jaitley and Sushma Swaraj (respectively) said the party has not softened its stand on the issue and Modi has only said what Shyama Prasad Mukherjee had earlier stated.



"It would be incorrect for anyone to interpret the BJP's challenge for a debate on this issue as a softening of stand on Article 370," Jaitley said.



Meanwhile, Sushma said: "Modi has asked what have been the benefits of Article 370. This is not being soft on the issue. Modi questioned whether there has been any gain from Article 370 and that this issue should be debated."



The Congress, meanwhile, dismissed Modi's call for a debate on Article 370 and advised the BJP leader to discuss the issue first with Sangh Parivar.



Congress general secretary Digvijaya Singh on Monday said he does not take Modi's statement very seriously as the BJP's prime ministerial candidate keeps changing it from one place to another. Alluding to the recent gaffes of Modi in rallies related to historical events, Singh said the Gujarat Chief Minister was unaware of history and has been speaking untruth on many issues.



"As far as my party is concerned, there in clarity on the issue (of Article 370 giving special status to Jammu and Kashmir). If Modi wants to debate, he should debate it within the BJP and the Sangh. We have no objection if Modi, BJP and the Sangh debate it within them," he said.



J&K police officer dead in militant attack



A police officer was killed and two of his colleagues wounded after militants attacked them at Chadoora town of Budgam district, about 15 km from Srinagar, on Monday.

"Militants killed a police officer and wounded three persons including a civilian in Chadoora on Monday. The attack took place when the police party was patrolling in the main market of Chadoora. It was an ambush," a police officer said.

Shabir Ahmad died on the spot while his two colleagues - Muhammad Shafi and Firdous Ahmad - were rushed to the nearest hospital. Their condition is stated to be stable.