SRINAGAR: After BJP's Amira Kadal candidate Hina Bhat declared that revoking Article 370 would compel her to take up arms, politicians across party lines in the state said the law was sacrosanct. Chief minister Omar Abdullah termed it Kashmir's only link with the rest of the country while PDP patron Mufti Sayeed said even Parliament did not have the mandate to review or abrogate Article 370.Chief minister Abdullah warned, "I am only cautioning those seeking to play with the provision of the constitution without understanding it fully and its importance for the Kashmiris. This Article of the constitution is an important link between Jammu-Kashmir and India."The Mufti said, "Even ordinary students of constitutional history know that Article 370 has gained a permanent status after the constitutional assembly of the state approved it."Meanwhile, Union minister of state for external affairs, Gen VK Singh, in Srinagar on a two-day visit, too assured the people of J&K on Saturday that any decision on the law would be left to them."They (the people) would themselves decide whether it's detrimental to them or beneficial for their welfare, after the elections. The BJP has said that since Article 370 is a part of the Indian constitution, it needs discussion," Singh said.Hina Bhat had earlier controversially said she would be the first to pick up a gun if Article 370 was revoked, and later said she was misquoted. Her retraction could be explained by the extreme sensitivity of most Kashmiris towards the law that they believe protects the state's demography. At the same time, people in Jammu favour its abrogation for the Valley's complete integration with the rest of the country.(Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah meeting supporters at an election meeting at Doderhama in Ganderbal distrtct on Saturday.)Gen Singh's visit, whose comments last year on the Army funding various groups and individuals came under fire, is part of the BJP's electoral strategy for the state. It assumes importance due to his links to several separatists, NGOs, mainstream political parties and media personalities."Besides the party candidates, Gen Singh would meet his acquaintances and former friends including politicians and NGOs for a first-hand feel of the election prospects of the BJP in Kashmir in particular," said Altaf Thakur, media in-charge of the Kashmir unit of BJP.Attacking the NC-Congress state government, Singh said, "The government here floundered (at the time of the flood) and these parties are now claiming they will get maximum seats in the upcoming elections." He expressed confidence in the Kashmiri people's desire for development. "They will certainly brush aside the boycott call of the separatist groups or the Hizbul Mujahideen outfit," he stated.Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is expected to visit Srinagar between November 21 and 25 to address a public rally in Sher-e-Kashmir municipal park in Lal Chowk in the city. The relative absence of Lotus banners and posters in the Kashmir valley has failed to prevent people from flocking to the party's public rallies. To date 17 candidates have been named by the BJP.