Two further killings take death toll to 29 in last five days

A slim hope of calm returning to Kashmir appeared to have been dashed tonight after a demonstrator was shot dead by security forces and another died of wounds, bringing to 29 the number of people killed during protests in the last five days.

This evening, announcements broadcast from mosques called for new demonstrations. Earlier, it had appeared that the deadly cycle of killings and protests that has continued since early June might have been broken when a veteran hardline leader called on protesters to show restraint when taking to the streets in coming days.

Syed Ali Shah Gilani, one of the most hardline of local political figures and perhaps the only one to command widespread authority among the largely teenage crowds who have been defying curfews in recent weeks, appealed for protests to remain peaceful.

In recent days, thousands of youths have pelted security forces with rocks, burned government offices and attacked railway stations and official vehicles in steadily intensifying violence. Police said two government buildings had been set on fire today in the southern town of Shopian.

Gilani, 80, told a crowd in Srinagar, the summer capital of India's only Muslim-majority state, that those who protested violently "did not belong to the Kashmir movement" and were only causing harm to the cause of the Kashmiri people.

With a new generation of alienated youth increasingly rejecting the leadership of well-established separatist parties in Kashmir, disputed between India and Pakistan for more than 60 years, the call is a crucial test of the power of Gilani. Both he and the protesters are frequently accused by Indian government officials of being "agitators" organised and financed by Pakistan.

Sheikh Shaukat, a professor of international law at Kashmir University, said Gilani's appeal for calm had been made irrelevant by new casualties.

"Any impact Gilani might have had was gone with the new killing. It has been another bloody day," Shaukat said. "Sentiments get infuriated and the youth cannot be controlled."

Shaukat said the situation in Kashmir was as bad as it had been for at least 15 years, since the bitter violence of the mid-1990s, in which tens of thousands died.

The elected state government of Kashmir, led by the youthful chief minister, Omar Abdullah, has been unable to re-establish order since the most recent bout of rioting and protests broke out.

Demonstrators have ignored a "shoot-at-sight" order issued on Tuesday and recent shows of strength by the army.

India's home minister, Palaniappan Chidambaram, told parliament today that "mindless violence and destruction of public property" would not lead to a solution. "On the contrary, they will result in the loss of lives and injuries to the protesters – an outcome that is entirely avoidable," he said.

Asking parents to stop their children from joining violent protests, the minister said the security forces had shown "commendable restraint", stressing that nearly 1,500 security personnel had been injured over two months.

However, most of the dead are protesters who have been shot by the police or died after being beaten. Hundreds have been injured. A spokesman for Indian paramilitary police said the force only opened fire in self-defence and always exercised "maximum self-restraint".