TSEWANG RIGZIN Too young to be addicts in Leh P50-56 CURRENT AFFAIRS Needed Ethnic VCs for J&K’s Universities ? (Please don’t ask teacher his caste) P44 D SUBA CHANDRAN Integrating Rajouri, Poonch with Mainstream P14 Epilogue J & K ’ S M O N T H LY M A G A Z I N E ISSN : 0974-5653 N E W S , C U R R E N T A F F A I R S , S O C I A L S C I E N C E S Jammu, May 1 ,2010 / Vol 4 / Issue 5 | Price Rs. 30 | Postal Regd. No. JK-350/2009 | www.epilogue.in RAJOURI-POONCH : A SCHOLARLY INSIGHT the MICROCOSM of PIR PANCHAL Mughal Road :The Charm of Rajouri, Poonch Social Structure and Perceptions of Regional Disparities Pir Panchal Regional Festival Facing the Challenges Ahead Who Patronises Caste Politics in Rajouri, Poonch Biodiversity, High Altitude Wetlands nsible jo se h year of 4t 41th f o issue e sens We tend to turn to the western periodicals. And, whatever is said by our people, enterprising youthful minds, with fresh ideas, is seen something without merit. Epilogue has changed that. It has generated awareness among the people that there was something more in it- both inside for the residents to see and analyze and for outside world to view it differently. ARUN JOSHI Deputy Editor, Hindustan Times m nalis ur P4 A land of varied attractions, Jammu has a surprise waiting for you at every corner. Savour the excitement at your own pace Patntiop 87 Kms from Katra Krimchi 55 Kms. from Katra Mansar Lake 18 Kms. from Jammu Pathankot NH Shiv Khori 78 Kms from Katra Ancient temples | Abodes of Gods & Goddess | Natural Caves | Forts & Palaces | Charming Meadows | Picturesque Plateau | Thickly Wooded Forests | Deep River Valleys | Nature’s Beauty | Heritage | Lakes of Blessings | Exclusive Hill Station - Patnitop IN TOUCH WITH THE DIVINE For further information, contact or write to: Government of J&K, J&K Tourism Offices at : • Jammu : Tel : 0191-2548172, Fax : 2548358 • Srinagar : Tel : 0194-2472449, 2452690-91, Fax : 2452361 • New Delhi : Tel : 011-23714948, Fax : 23714947 • Mumbai : Tel : 022-22189040 • Kolkata : Tel/Fax : 033-22285791 • Chennai : Tel./Fax : 044-28340958 • Ahmedabad : Tel./Fax : 079-25503551 • Hyderabad : Tel./Fax : 04024734806 •Visit us at www.jktourism.org. Email : jkdtourism@yahoo.co.in 1 Epilogue because there is more to know www.epilogue.in CONTENT Contributors to this Issue Letters Prologue Column Dateline : India-Pakistan The nitty-gritty details of my dream Manisha Shobarjani Editor Zafar Iqbal Choudhary Publisher Yogesh Pandoh Consulting Editors D. Suba Chandran Manu Srivatsa Associate Editors Irm Amin Baig Tsewang Rigzin Zorawar Singh Jamwal General Manager Kartavya Pandoh Art Editor Keshav Sharma Research Officer Raman Sharma Phones & email Office : +91 191 2493136 Editorial: +91 94191 80762 Administration: +91 94191 82518 subscriptions : +91 90188 87136 editor@epilogue.in subscription@epilogue.in Printed and Published by Yogesh Pandoh for Epilogue NewsCraft from Ibadat House, Madrasa Lane, Near Graveyard, Bathindi Top, Jammu, J&K - 180012 and Printed at : DEE DEE Reprographix, 3 Aikta Ashram, New Rehari Jammu (J&K) Disputes, if any, subject to jurisdiction of courts and competitive tribunals in Jammu only. RNI : JKENG/2007/26070 ISN : 00974-5653 Price : Rs 30 www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 2 3 5 6 Strengthen RTI to Right the Wrongs M Shamsur Rabb Khan 41 Current Affairs Needed Ethnic VCs for J&K’s Universities Volume 4, Issue 5, May 2010 Epilogue Correspondent 9 Please don’t ask teacher his caste Anmol Sharma 12 I N FOCUS The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 14 What Patronises Caste Politics in Rajouri, Poonch Zafar Choudhary Exclusive Stories Henry Scott The Forgotten Soldier of Kashmir Rakesh Ankit 44 17 Rajouri & Poonch : Facing the Challenges Ahead K D Maini Ladakh Affairs Vicious Cycle to Virtuous Cycle : 50 Ladakh’s Tryst with Education Reform Thinlas Dorjay Too young to be addicts Tsewang Rigzin 51 21 Social Structure and Perceptions of Regional Disparities Mazammal Hussain Malik Can Ladakhi students study in Ladakh? 52 Lobzang Stanzan 29 Pir Panchal Regional Festival Integrating Rajouri & Poonch with the mainstream D Suba Chandran Don’t Neglect It; Ladakh too is in India Stanzin Khewang 54 36 Mughal Road : The Charm of Rajouri, Poonch Pia Malhotra Bankers told to reach the masses Jora remote Durbuk block of Changthang Leh-Sringar highway reopens 55 56 56 39 Biodiversity, High Altitude Wetlands Pankaj Chandan Epilogue, May 2010 CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS ISSUE 2 Ankit, Rakesh; (Forgotten History p44) is a young historian from Bihar. As a Rhodes Scholar recently he studied various missing links in the making of Kashmir conflict. Based on his first hand study, he is contributing exclusive series to Epilogue Chandan, Pankaj; (In Focus, P39) is a wildlife and environment researcher currently looking after WWF-India's wetland projects Chandran, D Suba; (In Focus, p29) is Deputy Director at Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies. Author of many books and an acclaimed expert on Kashmir and Indo-Pak relations, he is Consulting Editor of Epilogue Magazine Choudhary, Zafar; (In Focus, p14) is Editor of Epilogue Magazine and also Executive Editor of Early Times, Daily Newspaper from Jammu Khan, M Samur Rabb; (Opinion p41) is Editor with Indian Institute of Dalit Affairs Maini, KD; (In Focus, P17) is a peace activist and acclaimed writer on the history and culture of Poonch. Author of many books, he has published his work in many leading newspapers. Based in Poonch, he also edits a journal called 'Peace'. Malhotra, Pia; (In Focus, P36) is with Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, New Delhi. Malik, Mazammal Hussain; (In Focus, P21) teaches Sociology at a Government College in Jammu and Kashmir Sharma, Anmol; (Current Affairs, P12) a regular writer at Epilogue, he is a practicing lawyer at Jammu and Kashmir High Court Sobhrajani, Manisha (Features, P6), is a Delhi based independent researcher working on the various aspects of Kashmir conflict. She divides her time between Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir Readers' requests for getting in touch with the authors, for feedback, comments and further discussions on their subjects of interest, are welcome. Since all authors/contributors are not interested in taking mails directly, the readers are requested to send us interview requests at editor@epilogue.in for passing on to the authors www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 3 Letters Readers Write Ankit Doing Great Job T he years of 1947-48 is the most misunderstood period in the history of Jammu and Kashmir. Who did what and who had actually wanted has all been hearsay over the years. In absence of any authentic documents, our political class has been choosing the convenience of attributing statements and actions to different actors of that time. For example, the National Conference leaders while in Kashmir or specifically in opposition charge the Maharaja Hari Singh of acceding to India without taking into account popular wishes of the majority. When they are in power or addressing a constituency in Jammu or making a larger statement to India they credit Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah for making Jammu and Kashmir a part of India. In the latter case, the National Conference enlarges the debate to drive home a point that Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah emerged as the most important Muslim leader of the subcontinent to defeated Mohammad Ali Jinnah's two nation theory. Rakesh Ankit in Pandit Ramchandra Kak: The Forgotten Premier of Kashmir (Epilogue, April 2010) seem to have brought to public knowledge few facts for the first time. Though the present essay does not deal fully with all aspects of accession but your exclusive series with Rakesh Ankit on 'New Research on Kashmir' is certainly a new well researched and much needed addition to the public knowledge on history of Kashmir. We hope that this series continues for long and unfolds many unknown aspects of those crucial and decisive years. After all what is happening today in the region and in the larger question of India and Pakistan relations has its roots in the developments you are discussing in this series. AFTAB MIR Srinagar Budget Simplified! efore 2007 I had no idea of how state budget is formulated, what are key parameters, how money is earned and distributed and why a common man should at all be concerned about this technical thing. It was in 2007 when I first read Prof Nisar Ali's analysis of the budget in Epilogue and thought that it was perhaps written for a person like me who is keen but has no knowledge of state finances. Year after year your coverage of budget has gone finer. As I read the 'Road to Recovery' Epilogue (April 2010) I have all the details of state budget on my finger tips. There are no technical terms. Every aspect of the budget has been written in such a simplified manner as it makes a good reading for a beginner. I hope this trend is continued not only with budgets but also with all the subjects you deal with. Don't Ignores Vital Issues In recent two months, the politics remained unusually eventful in Jammu and Kashmir. Once again the Kashmir based arch rivals –the National Conference and the Peoples Democratic Party –were seen in consensus on issues which boil up sentiments in Jammu region. Not only was the consensus between these 'north pole-south pole', their stand was also supported by the separatist Hurryiat Conference. I am talking about the inter-district recruitment bill and permanent residents' disqualification bill. On such issues the media in Jammu and Kashmir divide on the regional lines, something which Epilogue never did. But we were surprised to see that there was no coverage of these issues at all. Editors should take note if such important issues are left ignored by journals like Epilogue, readers might not get to read a balanced story at all. RANJIT JAMWAL, ARSHAD HUSSAIN Jammu B JAVED AHMED University of Kashmir www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 Letters Readers Write 4 Epilogue has given something to all of us to feel proud of W ARUN JOSHI orld begins somewhere. It begins from here- the land where we live. In this case, it is Jammu and Kashmir. That is, from where a voyage for strategic journalism began. Three years ago, Epilogue, hit stands, with many skeptical minds questioning the wisdom of talking in depth of the issues, for which the readers didn't have time to read. Still ruled by the colonial mindset, where there is a quest to look for what West is saying about our land, our people and our issues, whether it concerned our political voices, and economic development or otherwise, our farming community or water. We tend to turn to the western periodicals. And, whatever is said by our people, enterprising youthful minds, with fresh ideas, is seen something without merit. Epilogue has changed that. First thing first, it has generated an awareness among the people of this state, often described in terms of – “ a disputed territory”, “ nuclear flashpoint”, “ hotbed of militancy”, “ beautiful but bloodied,” that there was something more in it- both inside for the residents to see and analyze. And for outside world to view it differently. This magazine has done that. Undoubtedly, it is an achievement in itself. It has given something to all of us to feel proud of. It has infused a sense that it can be done. Its editor, Zafar Choudhary , has set a trend , in establishing a fact that the world view is not in the think tanks or journals based In Washington DC or London or Brussels. It is here too, and even without the help of borrowed magnifying glasses and thoughts from the west – J&K has its own intellectual capital. There is a need to see it. The pages of Epilogue offer a plenty of that. ARUN JOSHI Deputy Editor, Hindustan Times www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 5 PROLOGUE From the Editor Inside the Mind of Pir Panchal ZAFAR CHOUDHARY ooking at Jammu and Kashmir in bits and pieces divided on linguistic, ethnic, cultural and geographical lines will always keep the pot boiling. With little readjustment of emotional spaces the state will have to get into a working operation of single entity to reach a stage of stability where conflict can be seen as thing of past. However, achieving this homogeneity at the cost of suppressing many identities for one will always throw disastrous results. Instead of breeding hatred and contempt between identities we need to forge alliance between them for which there is imminent need of first understanding and then respecting each identity and its aspirations. In at least our four exclusively focused issues in past three years we have argued that Jammu and Kashmir is not ‘only Kashmir’ as it is seen in the approaches applied at national and international level towards understanding of this conflict riddled state. There are three historically, geographically and culturally well defined regions –Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh. Until recently, the overall reference to Kashmir would invite reaction from Jammu and Ladakh as people there wanted to be heard and known by their own identity. Last two decades, therefore, saw emergence of strong regional identity of Jammu and Ladakh as people wanted and to some extent got a seat at dialogue table, role in L decision making process and share in resources. Deficits –of logics and also of perceptions –are still there and so are the movements at different levels. Emergence of these regional identities, instead of resolving any issue, has compounded the understanding with further emergence of sub regional identities from the margins. Kargil in Ladakh region, Chenab Valley –comprising districts of Doda, Kishtwar and Ramban –and Rajouri-Poonch sub-regions within Jammu region are the case in point. As it unfolds in the following pages, the twin border districts of Rajouri and Poonch occupy a unique position in Jammu and Kashmir. Studded with the Line of Control along Pakistan administered Kashmir, these districts despite being Muslim majority refuse to be seen as part of a larger Kashmiri identity. On the other hand they find very little in aspirations and sentiments to share with the Jammu based urban politics which is mostly seen under the Hindu rightwing influence. While these two districts have maintained a fair distance from the core separatist politics despite the fact that nearly half of Muslim families there have a sibling in the Pakistan administered Kashmir, militancy too in this region could not take firm roots as it did in Kashmir Valley. In context of present political scenario, gradually, Rajouri and Poonch districts have established an identity of their own. The present issues looks into some aspects of this regional identity with a scholarly approach. Feedback : zafarchoudhary@epilogue.in OCTOBER 2009 NOVEMBER 2007 MAY 2008 www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 COLUMN 6 Indo-Pak Dialogue DATELINE: India-Pakistan The nitty-gritty details of my dream MANISHA SOBHRAJANI It would be naive to assume that the transformation of the 'state of Jammu & Kashmir' into the 'Kashmir issue' happened once India was divided into India and Pakistan. The troubled history of the region dates back to a time much beyond the Partition. However, the 'love-hate triangle' of India, Pakistan and Kashmir was born the minute there was talk of Partition. Let us briefly go through the events since. n British, before making their exit from the Indian The empire, divided it into 'Hindu' India and 'Muslim' Pakistan, a move which led to one of the most gruesome incidents of migration and partition in modern history in the year 1947. n In 1947/48, the two newly created nations go to war over Kashmir, ultimately leading to UN intervention. A ceasefire was regimented, resulting in the division of Jammu & Kashmir into Indian and Pakistan administered Kashmirs. Orders were issued to carry out a plebiscite to ascertain whether the people of Jammu and Kashmir wanted to be a part of India or Pakistan. The plebiscite, however, still remains elusive. n saw the second war over Kashmir, and the UN again 1965 had to call for ceasefire. n Pakistan and India went to war for a third time, resulting in the creation of Bangladesh, in 1971. n Simla Agreement was signed in 1972 between The Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. n In 1974, India ignites its first nuclear device. n Trouble starts brewing in 1989 with separatist revolt in Indian Kashmir. n conducts nuclear tests in 1998, followed by India Pakistan. n Lahore summit takes place in 1999 between Indian The Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. n 1999 Kargil war takes place. The n Agra Summit between Pakistani President General The Pervez Musharraf and Indian Prime Minister Vajpayee takes place in 2000, which does not result in any significant development. WULAR BARRAGE is a Kashmir Water Storage dispute (Under IWT) between India & Pakistan SIR GREEK is a boundary issue between India & Pakistan along Indian State of Gujarat & Pakistani province of Sindh PM www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 7 column Indo-Pak Dialogue VAJPAYEE AND MUSHARRAF met in Agra on July 15, 2000. Talks failed but note without making a symbolic importance CEASEFIRE AGREEMENT between India & Pakistan on Line of Control is a best kept Confidence Building Measure despite aberrations n In 2001, the Indian Parliament is attacked by militants. India blames Pakistan-based Kashmiri separatist groups Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM). A war-like situation prevails in both countries, and armies are mobilised on either side of the border. War is averted almost 6 months later, in 2002. n A ceasefire agreement takes place between India and Pakistan on the Line of Control in 2003, followed by a formal peace process in 2004. n In 2006, a series of seven bomb blasts take place over a period of 11 minutes on the Suburban Railways in Mumbai. n In 2007, bombs go off in two carriages of the Samjhauta Express -- a twice-weekly train service connecting Delhi and Lahore. n Mumbai multiple terror attacks in 2008 again lead to a The war-like situation between the two countries. n In 2009, Pakistan admits, after much pressure, that the Mumbai attacks were planned in Pakistan. Later in the year, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari meet on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Summit in Russia. India and Pakistan agree to work together to fight terrorism. However, Prime Minister Singh, after talks with Pakistani counterpart Yusuf Raza Gilani in Egypt, rules out a resumption of the 'composite dialogue'. n In 2010, the two countries exchange fire across the border, creating a tense atmosphere. Later, a bomb explodes in a bakery in Pune. In the 'Conflict Transformation and Peace-building' arena, we are often asked to do a hypothetical exercise where we are encouraged to predict where two warring parties might stand, say, 20 years from their current position. The trick is to jump straightaway 20 years hence, and then take 20 steps backwards, in terms of trying to ascertain what the two parties might do every year to get to their ultimate goal (of where they might be 20 years later). Let us try to attempt this in the case of India and Pakistan. n The state of Jammu & Kashmir is one of the best pre2030: vailing tourism spots in South Asia, jointly managed by India and Pakistan—the LoC serving as some kind of a permanent demarcation between territories administered by the two countries. The people of the two territories have access to the entire region without the hassle of formal travel documents. n The two countries come to an agreement on Sir 2028: Creek. n Water issues between India and Pakistan are 2026: resolved to the satisfaction of both. n Wullar Barrage dam provides water energy not just 2024: to Indian-administered-Kashmir but also to Pakadministered-Kashmir. www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 column Indo-Pak Dialogue 8 n Siachen ceases to be 2022: the world's highest battleground. n Discussions around the 2020: actual issue of Kashmir lead to step-by-step solutions in terms of territories, both common and individual. n The Mughal road, by 2018: now fully functional, aids and sustains dialogue. n Intra-Kashmir bus ser2016: vices and trade routes are exemplary. n Both countries elimi2014: nate all formulas towards the resolution of the Kashmir issue not acceptable to each other. n 2012: India and Pakistan agree on terrorism and Kashmir as the two main areas of trepidation between them. n 2010: The two countries resume dialogue—whether c o m p o s i t e o r o t h e rwise—and take up every opportunity that comes their way to 'talk', whether at the Foreign Secretaries' level or Prime Minsters' level. India, on its part, forgoes any assumptions of being 'holier than thou', and Pakistan stops pretending the world can't see what it does! Kashmiris, on their part, accept the fact that their future is inter-related to the relationship between the two countries, and do whatever they can to aid dialogue. Wishful thinking? I am certain it is not! I implore leaders of all three parties—India, Pakistan and Kashmir—to come together and work out the nitty-gritty details of my dream. PRIME MINISTERS Manmohan Singh and Yousaf Raza Gilani have been shaking hands at International forums but a one-to-one meeting is a long pending desire www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 GRAPHIX Epilogue, May 2010 9 current Affairs Education-Politics Needed Ethnic VCs for J&K's Universities? EPILOGUE CORRESPONDENT Identifying people by their religions, castes and places of births has always been a taboo at the Epilogue but this detail is being painfully compiled in context of recent debate as who should administer the Universities in Jammu and Kashmir. n the urban areas of Jammu region the elitist debate is centered on the grouse that three important Universities in the region are being repeatedly put under the stewardship of non-locals –which means people not born in Jammu and this term also includes those belonging to the Kashmir Valley. Prof Varun Varun Sahni from Delhi is currently Vice Chancellor of the University of Jammu, Prof B Mishra is heading the local Agricultural University, Prof PNK Bamezai, a Kashmiri Pandit is new Vice Chancellor of Mata Vaishno Devi University. A former top Police Officer Masud Chaudhary, a Gujjar from Poonch, is the Vice Chancellor of Baba Ghulam Shah Badshah University based at Rajouri but that region (Rajouri-Poonch), ironically, has rarely been part of any debate in Jammu. The immediate trigger in the case is the impending appointment of the Vice Chancellor of yet-to-come-up Central University of Jammu. A Central University, along with an IIM, was sanctioned by the UPA-I but it could not roll out in 2009 due the regional politics on location of University. Initial indications suggested that University was coming up in Kashmir after a Kashmiri academician, Prof Abdul Waheed Qureshi, was I appointed as Vice Chancellor and he set up temporary office in Srinagar. Several Jammu based political parties and other organizations, actively backed by BJP, wanted Central University to be established in Jammu at any cost. Shutdowns, protests and demonstrations followed. Congress, a part of the ruling alliance in state and an ace com- While in political circles the debate on appointment of Vice Chancellors veers around the domicile and ethnic considerations, in academic circles it goes much beyond that. Is Jammu and Kashmir a 'colony' of Jawaharlal Nehru University? This is the question dominating select academic circles. The present Vice Chancellors of four of the seven Universities have their academic backgrounds linked to the Jawaharlal Nehru University petitor of BJP in local political scene saw the ground slipping and put its weight behind the row. In summer 2009, Chief Minister Omar Abdullah led a cabinet delegation to the Prime Minister and surrendered the IIM for another Central University to be established in Jammu. A bad deal, indeed! In a regionally and ethnically polarized state, the decision was celebrated in Jammu as a great victory –second highest moment of glory after the 2008 Amarnath temple land row. Now when names are being screened for appointment of the Vice Chancellor for Central University of Jammu, there is a fresh round of anger and anxiety in the town as media speculations are zeroing in on Prof Amitabh Matoo of Jawaharlal Nehru University, a Kashmiri Pandit who headed the University of Jammu between 2002 and 2008. A section of press in Jammu is replete with opinionated columns on front pages strongly batting for a Dogra academician to head the Central University. No names have, however, been suggested for the post. While reputed academicians are critical of such demands as they fear trivialization and petty regionalization of the institutes of higher learning, this feature is not very unique to Jammu region. It was not long ago when a distinguished academician and administrator Prof Jalees Ahmed Khan Tareen was shooed away from the University of Kashmir for being non Kashmiri. Prof Tareen, now Vice Chancellor of Puducherry University, was sent packing at a time when the choice of his successor was not clear in mind. Between 2000 and 2004, a seniormost teacher at the campus Prof www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 current affairs Education-Politics 10 Abdul Waheed Qureshi funcA section of press in Jammu is replete tioned as 'acting' Vice with opinionated columns mostly on Chancellor at various occafront pages strongly batting for a Dogra sions before he was formally academician to head the Central designated as Vice University. No names have, however, Chancellor in 2004 and held been suggested for the post. While the Chair until 2008. Prof reputed academicians are critical of Riyaz Punjabi, another such demands as they fear trivialization native Kashmiri, succeeded and petty regionalization of the Qureshi who is now first Vice institutes of higher learning, such Chancellor of the Central demand is not unique to Jammu University of Kashmir. At seven Universities functioning in Jammu and Kashmir, Vice Chancellors of three are not from the state, two are headed by Kashmiri Muslims, one by a Kashmiri Pandit, one by a Gujjar Muslim and one by a Delhiite. Three of the seven Universities are relatively new. The two Agricultural Universities have mostly been dominated by non-local Vice Chancellors while the two main Universities –the University of Kashmir and University of Jammu –have had most of their Vice Chancellors local academicians except some initial years in University of Kashmir when distinguished people like KM Panicker and TM Advani topped the charts. Unfortunately, the obtaining academic and research environment of the Universities during tenures of different Vice Chancellors hardly becoming part of the debates dominated by 'who was born where and what language he spoke issue'. While in political circles the debate on appointment of Vice Chancellors veers around the domicile and ethnic considerations, in academic circles it goes much beyond that. Is Jammu and Kashmir a 'colony' of Jawaharlal Nehru University? This is the question dominating select academic circles. The present Vice Chancellors of four of the seven Universities have their academic backgrounds linked to the Jawaharlal Nehru University. Questions like JNU background or regional and ethnic identities are increasingly becoming parts of discussions as locals eye the top positions. One important issue which is not being questioned or answered in any of such debates is who many academicians or scholars the Universities in Jammu and Kashmir produced who made a mark at the national level. There are It was not long ago when a distinguished only few who can be counted academician and administrator Prof on fingers and most of them Jalees Ahmed Khan Tareen was shooed have already got the rewards away from the University of Kashmir for they deserved. What Jammu being non Kashmiri. Prof Tareen, now and Kashmir ideally needs is Vice Chancellor of Puducherry a discussion on why the local University, was sent packing at a time talent is not reaching the when the choice of his successor was national horizons of academic excellence. not clear in mind Now Know UNIVERSITY OF KASHMIR ROF REYAZ PUNJABI: An ethnic Kashmiri, he studied and taught at University of Kashmir before moving to Jawaharlal Nehru University. Doctorate in Law and expert on International Peace and Conflict Studies he is also a visiting Professor and fellow in Jamia Millia Islamia, Indian Institute of Advance Study and Centre for South Asian Studies Switzerland. Predecessors: Prof Abdul Wahid Qureshi (Kashmiri), Prof Jalees AK Tareen (Karnataka) P UNIVERSITY OF JAMMU ROF VARUN SAHNI: A Hindu from Delhi, is an author of at least 75 reach articles in highly acclaimed journals and books. Editor of South Asian Survey he taught at JNU and lectured at National Defence College, Foreign Service Institute, College of Naval Warfare, Mumbai; Army War College, Mhow; Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich; Australian Defence College, Canberra Royal Australian Naval College, Jervis Bay; and the LBSNAA. He has held visiting fellowships/professorships at Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico (1997), CIDE, Mexico City (1997-1999) National Defense University, Washington DC and the Asia Pacific College of Diplomacy. Predecessors: Amitabh Mattoo (Kashmiri Pandit), RR Sharma (a Dogra from Jammu) P www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 11 current Affairs Education-Politics Them By Castes ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ROF SIDDIQ WAHID: A Shia Muslim from Leh (not Kargil), his family lived in Kashmir and he studied and taught mostly in US and Europe before taking this assignment. Holding an M.B.A. and a Ph.D. from Harvard in Inner Asian and Altaic history, Wahid is a much sought after public lecturer on peacemaking, Kashmir and Muslim world. Predecessors: Incumbent is founder Vice Chancellor since 2004 BABA GHULAM SHAH BADSHAH UNIVERSITY asud Chaudhary: A Gujjar Muslim from Poonch, he was Additional Director General of J&K Police when Mufti Mohammad Sayeed government appointed him as Project Director and CEO. Upon retirement from Police the same year he was elevated as Vice Chancellor. An alumni of Aligarh Muslim University, he set a rare example of bringing up the poorly funded University in competition with many in league of best. Predecessor: the incumbent is founder Vice Chancellor since 2004 P M SKUAST-KASHMIR rof ANWAR ALAM: A Muslim from Allahabad in Uttar Pradesh, he is an outsider for Kashmir but never faced any criticism for his domicile. A doctorate in 1972 from University of Illinois, Urbana–Champing, USA and D. Sc (Honoris Causa) in 1999 from Chander Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and Technology, Kanpur, worked in US for four years and also remained Chief Technical Adviser FAO. Predecessors: Prof MY Kamal (Delhi), Prof Dar (Kashmir) P SHRI MATA VAISHNO DEVI UNIVERSITY rof RNK BAMEZAI: A Kashmiri Pandit, is a Doctorate in Human Genetics and worked at National Centre of Applied Genetics, School of Life Sciences, JNU. He is credited with more than 29 years' experience of teaching and guiding research in various Universities in the country and has trained more than 300 researchers in the past seven years in the area of Human Genetics and Genomics. He has also lectured at various Universities abroad and authored nearly a hundred research papers published in eminent journals within and outside the country. Predecessor: Prof NK Bansal, Prof Chattoo (a Kashmiri Pandit) P SKUAST-JAMMU r B Mishra: A Hindu from Benaras in Uttar Pradesh, he is a famous rice and wheat breeder. He headed the Directorate of Rice Research (DRR), Hyderabad and Directorate of Wheat Research (DWR), Karnal - the two most important crops, rice and wheat, contributing more than 75 % to National Food basket. He was National rice and wheat research programme leader for more than eight years. Predecessors: Nagendra Sharma (Bihar), Hashmatullah Khan (Kashmiri civil servant) D www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 current affairs 12 Education-Politics Please don't ask teacher his caste ANMOL SHARMA Theatrics in the local news has sadly started once again. The circus this time will be performed by unschooled creatures and the uneasiness here is that it will be as outrageous as the “Magic Show” held recently in a broken movie theater of Jammu. But one thing is sure that it is going to be a typical case of comedy of errors because something that will be put on show which is completely alien even to them. The analogy here is the slang of pseudo-literate individuals about extremely delicate subject like manner and system of learning in the upcoming Central University of Jammu. f any such doubt would have been expressed by academicians from Jammu that a non Dogra Vice Chancellor is incompetent in merits to perform, then things would have been comprehensible. But such speeches from the mouths of ordinary politicians and people who have no acquaintance with academics is both weird and bizarre. Irony does not stop here. There are also some academicians and watchdogs of public affairs seeking privileged entry in the fourth estate sharpening the debate for a Dogra Vice Chancellor. It is an interesting debate minus the fact that they are not dropping any guess on choices. Would not it have been appropriate for people who are against NonDogra as VC to have also suggested the name or names of few individuals who they suppose are better suited than any other professor in India. I say this because the prime consideration for any well wisher of students is that the best individual should be managing this premier institution. There can, of course, be better persons than the one being tipped to take over the Vice Chancellor. Isn't it time to unveil their names to help I the selectors with choices? Don't we desire only one thing from the selectors that only best faculty should tutor a Jammuite? Is this not good enough that only the best should teach us? Moreover, the matchless wisdom rooted in our Holiest scriptures like Srimad Bhagvatam and Ramayana is that Guru should be peerless and expert in his field. This has repeatedly been declared as the only criteria and there is no other parameter apart from this. The glorious Saint Kabir has also spoken in a similar comportment when he sang “Jaat na pucho sadh ki, pucho sadh ka gyan, mol karo talwar, padi rahen do mayan.” His forceful declaration to all and sundry is, please do not ask the teacher his caste, (or his place of birth in this case) just be his obedient student. So in other words Saint Kabir also forbids us not to display the height of stupidity by asking a teacher a question like, Are you from Jammu? By demanding that only Dogra should teach in CU is in fact going quite opposite to the wisdom of Kabir Das. Education is such a treasure that Lord Rama directed his younger brother Lakshman to go and learn wisdom by sit- ting near the feet of Ravana. What more can be said about the philosophy of Education. If we can learn something good from anybody then even a prostitute can be accepted as a Guru like ancient Sage Dattatreya did, whose prehistoric temple is located in our very own circular road! The greatest spiritualist of Hindus Sage Shukdev Goswami advised King Parikshit that one should learn only from an exalted soul even if he very much ridicules you. On the other hand we in Jammu instead of hailing, are ridiculing any eminent scholar of national fame who is willing to come to Jammu and impart knowledge at our door steps. What can be more unfortunate for us and what a pity that we think like this? Of course, a Dogra academician rising to the high position of Vice Chancellor of a Central University will bring a sense of highest pride and honour to this land of Dogra but the way this case is being presented on the 'sole basis if ethnicity' reflects our intellectual bankruptcy. Isn't it? Since a couple of newspapers speculated the names of Amitabh Mattoo and Siddiq Waheed, there is a whole gung-ho against them. www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 13 current Affairs Education-Politics Why oppose two particular academicians? Why not propose the alternate names. ome of these phony people who are doing interviews in the press supporting a dogra VC have themselves studied out of the Jammu and their children have also done their education from outside. So why are they denying the students of far off places who manage to enter CU the privilege of being trained by a person who has national/international expertise in his field. The focal idea behind the inception of these universities was that they will entertain international faculty as well as international under-grads/grads students who aspire specialized schooling. The whole idea of a desi Rector or chief executive for CU will keep on short-circuiting this principle value and goal behind this Institute. The person who is shouting the loudest in the melee of dogra as VC of CU has ironically forgotten that he himself was not a student of Jammu University when the same course which he studied outside was available in J&K at that time. Just for arguments sake, if today suppose IIT is planned to be opened in Jammu will they also then insist that some person from ITI, Vikram Chowk, be made its head? I believe it would be complete madness even to think like that!! I only thank my stars that AIIMS like institute failed to come up in Jammu. Otherwise they would have also demanded that only Jammu Doctors should be appointed and Gods knows what kind of standard of that Jammu AIIMS would have been then. All those who demand that Desi VC should be there must on principle declare that they will bind themselves to be (mis) treated in GMC by desi-doctors only and will never go outside the state in crisis as on the principle of parity they mean the same. Mr VC, ARE YOU FROM JAMMU? Sant Kabir's forceful declaration to all and sundry is, please do not ask the teacher his caste, (or his place of birth in this case) just be his obedient student. So in other words Saint Kabir also forbids us not to display the height of stupidity by asking a teacher a question like, Are you from Jammu To ask a bitter question then what is the standard of Jammu University compared at National level? What is the level of research done in the Physics, Mathematics, Law Departments? Where everyone passes the exam after fixing the result in re-evaluation? Are students from SMVDU (Headed by non-dogra VC) not better placed than students from JU? Reasoning would have been in the fact that only academicians who are like swans (Hans) be left to do the job that they know best and for the rest of owls and crows the saying of the legend Socrates is apt when he says, “Nature has given us two ears, two eyes, and but one tongue, to the end that we should hear and see more than we speak.” Epilogue because there is more to know Regional in Content National in Presence Ask for your copy at : ? Sagar Book Center Abhijeet Pune, MAHARASHTRA ? Book Center American Anna Salai, Chennai TAMIL NADU ? & Co. B N Dey Pan Bazaar, Guwahati ASSAM ? Kumar Deepak Magazine Agents, Patna BIHAR ?Bose Magazine Agent Dey & Howrah, WEST BENGAL ? Ideal Books Tutors Line, Trissur KERALA ? JMD Book House Shimla HIMACHAL PRADESH ? House Life Book Himidira Road Bhopal MADHYA PRADESH ? Book House Modern Lucknow, UTTAR PRADESH ?Agencies Rajesh Jaipur RAJASTHAN ?News Agency Shams Farmanwadi, Hyderabad ANDHRA PRADESH ? Uniquality News Agency Bapuji Nagar, Bhubaneshwar ORISSA PROPOSE, DON'T OPPOSE NAMES Of course, a Dogra academician rising to the high position of Vice Chancellor of a Central University will bring a sense of highest pride and honour to this land of Dogra but the way this case is being presented on the 'sole basis if ethnicity' reflects our intellectual bankruptcy. Isn't it? Since a couple of newspapers speculated the names of Amitabh Mattoo and Siddiq Waheed, there is a whole gung-ho against them. Why oppose two particular academicians? Why not propose the alternate names. India Book House, MUMBAI Oxford Book Stores NEW DELHI, MUMBAI, KOLKATTA, CHENNAI, BANGALORE & GOA Central News Agency, NEW DELHI www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus 14 The Microcosm of Pir Panchal Who Patronises Caste Politics in Rajouri, Poonch By offering petty largesse to local legislators, NC and Congress have systematically kept this region unrepresented in Cabinet for last 10 years ZAFAR CHOUDHARY Within the definition of 'mainstream' if you are looking for best examples of participatory, competitive and truly democratic politics in Jammu and Kashmir, the twin border districts of Rajouri and Poonch, perhaps, offer an excellent example. If castes were not a factor, Rajouri and Poonch would have offered best examples of secular politics as well but such a possibility is remote. Even if people burry the caste hatchet the political parties –particularly National Conference and Congress –would never let them do. mix of different identities and cultures, the political landscape, particularly the electoral politics, of Rajouri and Poonch has always remained different from any other part of Jammu and Kashmir. Elections have never been unusually rigged here and the poll percentage has often registered much higher than the state average. Consisting of seven assembly constituencies, this Muslim majority region never allowed the separatist politics to creep in in any form. A part of larger definition of Jammu region, Rajouri-Poonch have always rejected the religious factor in politics as it prevails in the plains of Jammu where the discourse often veers around Jammu versus Kashmir to touch down an obvious undercurrent of Hindu versus Muslim. The twin districts have mixed population of Hindus and Muslims even as Muslims further stand bitterly divided along castes and languages. It is this division between Muslims –Gujjars and Paharis –which offers fodder to the political parties. A These two communities differ from each other on a range of issues and the political parties in power often offer doles to keep both in good humour. As bitterness between Gujjars and Paharis grows over the years, the political parties have walked an extra mile to catch hold of the either community. In this reach out drive from time to time, individuals have benefitted greatly while the plight of common peoples has not improved much. The region therefore remains one of the most backward –educationally, socially and economically –in the state. Rajouri-Poonch is perhaps one and the only region in the state which has always remained under-represented, sometimes not represented at all, in the decision making process even as these two districts constitute the safe pocket boroughs of the ruling parties. National Conference has its deep roots in the region and Congress as its traditional competitor until Peoples Democratic Party of Mufti Mohammad Sayeed made inroads. There were times getting National Conference for assembly elections would in itself be taken as a victory and the voting a mere formality. Such was the influence of National Conference and following of Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah in the region. The Congress later made steady inroads and became a main competitor of the National Conference. In 1957 elections when there were only five constituencies, the National Conference bagged four while one –Nowshera –went to the Congress. However, in 1962 elections all five seats went to the NC basket. Since 1967 and 72 elections were all Congress affairs while Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah was in jail, National Conference bagged one of the five seats –Darhal –in 1972. In a discredited poll history of Jammu and Kashmir before 2002 elections, the 1977 elections were regarded as the best of the times. That year, with addition of one more constituency, NC won two seats, three went to Congress and one to an independent. In the bitterly fought elections of 1983 when National Conference was almost www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 15 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal To keep its Gujjar constituency happy the Congress installed veteran leader Choudhary Mohammad Aslam as leader of the Congress Legislature Party in Assembly. Shabir Ahmed Khan was inducted as Minister of State to keep Paharis represented in the Council of Ministers. Congress also bagged the office of Gujjar Advisory Board and appointed Bashir Ahmed Naaz as its Vice Chairman to send across a message in the region that party is sensitive about Gujjars. Naaz had lost 2008 elections to Ajaz Jan of National Conference in Poonch constituency. With Congress's suddenly growing love for Gujjars, National Conference jumped in to own up the Paharis. It was widely expected that Vice Chairmanship of Pahari Advisory Board might go to Kafil-ur-Rehman, a legislator from Karnah, for giving representation to Kupwara district but Omar Abdullah picked up Mushtaq Ahmed Bukhari for the post. Bukhari had lost 2002 elections to Choudhary Mohammad Aslam of Congress in Surankote constituency. routed out in Jammu region, the party had two face savers from RajouriPoonch. In 1987, NC bagged two seats from the region, Congress walked away with three and one went to an independent. The Congress was quick to decode the message and it inducted two of them as Cabinet Ministers with important portfolios and third one was made Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. Perhaps this was the time that initiated the process of erosion of the base of National Conference in this region. In 1996, National Conference won five seats from the region and Congress got two. NC formed government while Congress returned to opposition with only eight seats in its kitty. Despite being in opposition, RajouriPoonch again figured prominently in Congress scheme of things as the partly installed one of its two legislators from the region as its Chief Whip in the assembly. National Conference again misread the message. In return of five seats it bagged from the region, the party inducted two legislators –Mohammad Sharief Tariq and Nisar Ahmed Khan –as Ministers of State. Two years later they were elevated to the rank of Cabinet Minister but only to be sacked disgracefully in year 2000. Close to elections, Dr Farooq Abdullah inducted party's senior-most leader from the region Chowdhary Mohammad Hussain and a new comer Mushtaq Ahmed Bukhari as Ministers of State but that was largely seen in the region as an insult. In 2002, the National Conference tally remained intact but the party had lost power to a ragtag coalition of Peoples Democratic Party and Congress. This was the time for most of its hurt leaders to say enough is enough and switch sides to other parties. In these elections, the NC had bagged five seats, Congress one and one went to an independent. The Congress won over the lone independent candidate and then inducted both its legislators as Ministers of State. Another leader from the region –Shabir Ahmed Khan –was appointed as Vice Chairman of the Advisory Board for Pahari Speaking People, a post equivalent in status and rank of a Minister of State. Latest elections of 2008 have returned the National Conference with lowest ever tally of three. Two seats have been bagged by the Congress and the remaining two by the Peoples Choudhary Zulfikar Ali and Sardar Rafiq Hussain Khan won 2008 elections from Darhal and Surankote constituencies respectively on Peoples Democratic Party ticket. Both these constituencies have remained a traditional bastion of the National Conference. Zulfikar's father Choudhary Mohammad Hussain represented Darhal in 1967 through 1996, barring two exceptions. PDP's presence in Rajouri and Poonch is a sign of trouble for National Conference but the party is going overboard with caste and not specific public welfare measures. Since year 2000 there has been no representation from Rajouri-Poonch in the state Cabinet. Between 2002 and 2008 elections, two legislators were with the ruling alliance. Both were inducted as Ministers of State and none could make to the Cabinet. Both were dropped in November 2005 and only one of them returned the next year again as Minister of State. www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 16 MLA Kalakote Rashpal Singh, a Rajput fitting in the identity of Pahari, was picked up by Omar Abdullah for the post of Vice Chairman of Kissan Board –an office created on the same day when Rashpal was appointed its head with status of Minister of State. Since Congress had given representation to two Gujjars in the region, NC toyed with this creative idea as a caste balancing act. Jahangir Mir, Ravinder Sharma of Congress and MR Qureshi of National Conference are three Members of the Legislative Council from Rajouri and Poonch at present. Mir of Poonch was promised this seat in the Upper House in 2008 to surrender election ticket in favour of Bashir Ahmed Naaz in Poonch constituency. Ravinder Sharma, a Brahmin from Sunderbani is also a Pahari leader. Democratic Party. This time the ruling alliance is a partnership between Congress and the National Conference. Congress picked up its senior-most leader from the region Choudhary Mohammad Aslam, who won from Surankote constituency and installed him as leaders of its Legislature Party in the assembly. Though people had expected a ministerial berth for him but since party is encouraging young blood, the CLP leadership is an honour for Aslam. Its other winner from the region, Shabir Ahmed Khan has been inducted as a Minister of State with an array of departments under his charge. National Conference again missed the message only to late react in a hasty manner. As long as it was about giving representation to the region in decision making process, the Congress went slow and the National Conference just slept over things until the Gujjar Pahari factor hit the politics. It was at the time of distribution of non-ministerial posts between alliance partners, Congress and National Conference, that the caste factor in politics of Rajouri-Poonch suddenly assumed prominence. The Congress picked up a Gujjar from Poonch –Chowdhary Bashir Ahmed Naaz –and appointed him as Vice Chairman of the Advisory Board for Development of Gujjars, a post equivalent to a Minister of State in status and rank. This came in as knee jerk reaction for National Conference. Instead of making efforts at removing caste from politics, as one would have expected from a young and western educated leader like Omar Abdullah, the National Conference went on with a balancing act. To outsmart Congress, Omar Abdullah picked not one but two Pahari leaders for appointments to the posts carrying status and rank of a Minister of State. Mushtaq Ahmed Bukhari, who lost 2008 elections in Surankote constituency, has been appointed as Vice Chairman of the Advisory Board for Pahari Speaking People while Kunwar Rashpal Singh, MLA from Kalakote, was appointed Vice Chairman of Kissan Board, a new office created for welfare of farmers. Now Congress is harping on its Gujjar card and the National Conference is going full throttle to consolidate the Pahari speaking constituency. Both parties have been able to play their cards well at the cost of the people of Rajouri-Poonch. Individuals have benefitted from NC's and Congress's new penchant for Paharis and Gujjars and the region is against thrown outside the decision making process. Selective largesse offered to few leaders has clearly suggested that no legislator from Rajouri or Poonch is likely to make to the Cabinet in the present government. Meanwhile, the murky battle between Gujjars and Paharis has been left to them as keeping this caste conflict alive between the communities helps the parties. The main contention between the Gujjars and Paharis is the Scheduled Tribe state on which both groups continue to fight against each other under the larger political patronage. After 2008 elections, five of the seven legislators are part of ruling coalition but none of them in Cabinet. There is only one Minister of State from the region and three other leaders hold the rank and status of a Minister of State. The MoS Shabir Ahmed is a Pahari and belongs to Congress Take example of Ladakh: Of four seats in the region, three were with ruling alliance between 2002 and 2008 and two of them were Cabinet Ministers. In 2008, again three have returned in the ruling alliance and two of them are again Cabinet Ministers with important departments of Tourism, Culture; Consumer Affairs and Public Disbursement and Transport. www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 17 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal RAJOURI & POONCH: Facing the Challenges Ahead K.D. MAINI The twin districts Rajouri and Poonch fall in Pir Panchal belt of Jammu province. This is an important mountainous range which bifurcates the valley of Kashmir from the Jammu province. Stein, the commentator of Raj Tringani defined Pir Panchal track as a region located between the rivers Jehlum and Chenab in the southern and south-western slopes of this region, which starts from Banihal Pass and comprise of Rajouri, Budhal, Poonch on India side of LOC and Kotli, Rawalakote and Bagh on the other side of the LOC. The 223 kilometer long LOC touches the boundaries of Sunderbani, Nowshera, Rajouri and Manjakote blocks of Rajouri district and Balakote, Mendhar, Poonch and Mandi blocks of Poonch district. resently these twin districts of Pir Panchal track on Indian side of LOC comprise of one Municipal Council at Poonch, six notified area committees, 13 community development blocks and 563 villages. This track is located on extreme border in the tail end of Jammu province. Most of the area is cut off, mountainous and inaccessible. Very meager infrastructural facilities are available in this belt. Due to disadvantages caused by geographical conditions, existence on line of actual control, continuous cross firing and shelling across the border for about 8 years far away from power centres; and negligible representation in the political scenario and administrative setup of J&K state, the people of these border districts turn economically backward where 46% population is still living below the poverty line. 49% families are without power, 23% souls are without drinking water facilities, 73% families are residing in Kachha houses, 79% are without flush latrines, 29% villages are yet to be connected with roads, 43000 educated unemployed are wandering in P search of jobs. There is no medium or large scale industrial unit, no hydel project, commercial avenues are very limited. There is less than 1% representation in secretariat. No air link, no ATM and no rail link services are available in this track. The condition of only link road leading towards Jammu worsened for about last ten years. There are 62% Muslim families which are divided due to establishment of Line of Control. This scenario had turned the people of this district economically and educationally backward. As per the revenue record, the total area of Poonch-Rajouri districts is 4304 sq. kilometer while the projected population for the year 2009 is 10.63 lacs. As per the census 2001, the population of Rajouri district was 4.83 lacs, out of which 4.49 lacs were residing in rural areas while 0.34 lacs in the urban areas. There were 0.38 lacs Scheduled Casts and 1.67 lacs Schedule Tribe population in the district. The district was represented by 60.23% Muslims, 37.28% Hindus, 2.24% Sikhs, 0.02% Budhists, 0.04% Christians and 0.03% others. The total population of Poonch district was 3.73 lacs out of which 41% were Schedule Tribe, 52% were Paharis and 7% were Kashmiris while 87% were Muslims, 7% Hindus and 6% Sikhs. Hindus were dominating in Tehsil Nowshera, Sunderbani and Kalakote of district Rajouri while Muslim population was in majority in all the tehsils of Poonch districts apart from tehsil Thanamandi, Budhal and Rajouri of Rajouri district. In Poonch district before independence almost all the villages were having some minority population, however due to the happenings of 1947, 1965, 1971 and proxy war from 1989 onward, the minority population gradually migrated to other parts of the country and presently the Hindus and Sikhs are concentrated in Poonch, Surankote and Mendhar towns and eleven surrounding villages. The twin districts Rajouri and Poonch are dominated by 93% GujjarBakerwal tribes and Pahari speaking people including Hindus and Sikhs while 7% Kashmiri speaking population inhabiting in those villages which are nearer to the Kashmir valley. The historic back- www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 18 grounds, cultural aspects, dresses, diets, languages, habits, life style, economic conditions, miseries and problems of the people of this belt are very distinct as compared to the other districts of the Jammu province. In spite of sufferings and repeated disturbances, surprisingly, the people of this region had maintained communal harmony and peaceful atmosphere. The traditions of composite cultural heritage and secular outlook have traveled with the history. The brotherhood of the people of Poonch and Rajouri is taller than the mountains surrounding this belt. The ties of communal harmony, friendly relations and tolerance survived in very odd events of the history. The people of various religions, races and sections have a long tradition of restrain and respect of each other. RAJOURI Before 26th October 1846, Rajouri remained the principality of Jaral Muslim Rajas for about 700 years. These Rajas were secular and accommodative. The forces of Jaral Rajas were comprised of Hindu Rajputs apart from Muslims. The Prime Minister's post was always retained by Hindu Mehta family. As per Tuzk-e-Jhangiri there was a custom of inter-religious marriages between the royal Muslim Jaral Rajas and the Hindu Rajputs which was banned by the Emperor Jhangir during his visit of Rajouri in 1616. After the creation of new J&K state in 1846, in the light of Amritsar Pact between Raja Gulab Singh of Jammu and Britishers, the Rajouri principality was taken over by Maharaja Gulab Singh. The Muslim population of Rajouri was deadly against the rule of Maharaja Gulab Singh but there was no communal tension in this area. It is a fact that large number of minorities was killed in 1947 by the Sudan rebels under the leadership of Sakhi Daler and a deserter Colonel Rehmatullah of Maharaja's forces but the local Muslims had not taken part in this brutal act. At this crucial stage, there are hundreds of examples in which local Muslims had given shelter to Hindu brothers in the villages and protected their lives. POONCH In Poonch principality, the atmosphere of brotherhood and communal A fort suspension bridge in Rajouri. harmony was more congenial from early times. W.C Archer the writer of 'Indian Paintings of Punjab Hills' writes that during the rule of Raja Rustam Khan Rathore from 1760-1787, Poonch town was dominated by Hindu traders. Raja Rustam Khan was a disciple of a Hindu hermit. It was during his period when Dashnami Akhara Poonch was constructed by Raja Rustam Khan on the request of the hermit. In this period, number of Hindu traders, Hakims, Munshis and Artists had shifted from other parts to Poonch principality. They were having equal rights from the Raja's side while the Muslim natives had accommodated them in their villages. There was no official protection to minorities. The local Muslims were not only protective but also attentive to issues and affectionate in nature. Therefore, with the passage of time the minority people diluted their original identity and became the part of cultural heritage of this area. During the Gujjar rule of Raja Ruallah Khan Sangu on Poonch from 1798-1819, a great Sikh Saint Thakur Bhai Mela Singh had came to Poonch from Rawalakote in 1802 and established a Gurudwara Dera Santpura Nangali Sahib, the biggest Sikh shrine in J&K state at present. During the rule of local Dogra Hindu Rajas from 18521947, there was complete communal harmony in the region. Majority of the Ministers and officials of these Rajas were Muslims including the first and the last Prime Minister of Poonch Mian Nizam-ud-Din. After independence, the people of all the communities were living in an amiable manner, in the twin districts Poonch and Rajouri. There are such villages where 90% population belongs to one community and 10% to another. The minority population had never been given to understand that they are outsiders or different, rather they have been given more affection and respect www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 19 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal by the majority Muslim brothers who had always protected the minority population. The minority community was having full faith and confidence on the majority population. During militancy days, when a large section of the minority population were brutally killed, neither Hindu nor Sikh blamed the local Muslim brothers because they were aware of the fact that this was not a local act. Accordingly, hundreds of patriotic Muslims were beheaded, their houses were burnt and 21,000 thousand persons of Muslim community were compelled to migrate from their native places to security areas because they were patriotic, with a secular outlook and not hardliner; and never accepted the radical views of the militants. Therefore, the Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs jointly faced the militancy scenario 1989 onwards. ALONG THE MUGHAL ROAD : Thanna Mandi UNDERSTANDING THE CHALLENGES The above facts reveal that the habitants of twin districts of Rajouri and Poonch have always remained secular, moderate and accommodative. The cordial and friendly relations among the communities had given birth to composite cultural heritage. The most important factor behind this brotherhood was During militancy days, when a large section of the minority population were brutally killed, neither Hindu nor Sikh blamed the local Muslim brothers because they were aware of the fact that this was not a local act. Accordingly, hundreds of patriotic Muslims were beheaded, their houses were burnt and 21,000 persons of Muslim community were compelled to migrate the impact of Sufism on the life of the people of this region who taught love for mankind, tolerance and respect of all the religions. Almost every village have a Sufi Dargah, Asthan or Ziarat. These Sufi centres are still inspiring the people belonging to all the communities. The shrine of Shahdara Sharief Rajouri and Sain Miran Bakash Guntrian Poonch is equally respected by Hindus and Sikhs. The Urs of Sain Ellahi Bakash of Battlekote Mandi is organized by a NonMuslim Organization Pritam Spiritual Trust. On the eve of Rakshabandan Festival, the Chari Mubarakh Yatra which starts from Dashnami Akhara Poonch and leads towards Swami Budha Amarnath Mandi is received by Suni Muslims at Chandak and Shia Muslims in Mandi Bazar. The Muslims and Hindus jointly participate in Baisakhi Mela at Gurudwara Nangali Sahib. The oldest Ramkund Temple of Raja Lalita Ditya's time is located in hundred percent Muslim populated village Narol of Mendhar tehsil. The Muslim natives have been looking after and protecting the temple since centuries.. Therefore, we can say that the habitants of Poonch and Rajouri had managed and maintained an atmosphere largely free from communal hostilities. There is a big question that why communal conflicts of very serious nature erupted in this region during August 2008 which had tarnished and tainted our traditional brotherhood. Immediately after the happenings of Jammu and Srinagar during Amarnath Shrine episode, the hardliners and fanatics of Kashmir valley and Jammu city prevailed upon both the communities and communalize the situation in this border and sensitive track. On the inciting of outsiders, the small groups of local youths gathered in religious places, organized rallies and raised unwanted slogans on communal lines which had resulted the communal outbursts in Thanamandi, Surankote, Mendhar and Poonch town. The worst type of communal riots were in Poonch town, Bhainch and Dalera villages in which 134 shops and houses of both the communities were either burnt or looted. When the worse was taking www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 20 place, there were still cases of sympathy for the other community during the riots. The role of M.R Qureshi MLC Mendhar, PDP leader Hamid Manhas of Surankote and Yashpal Sharma of Poonch remain appreciable in restoring the confidence of people at this stage. No doubt those 16 months have been passed, law and order situation have been improved and composite cultural heritage have been restored up to some extent. But still doubts and confusion persists. There is a lack of trust and confidence due to the riots. The minority people both in rural and urban areas are still frightened, harassed and upset. The mistrust and the feeling of alienation have not been removed completely from their minds. There are various factors behind this tension. The Paksponsored agencies are working in this sensitive area to disrupt the normal life, destabilize the region and create communal tension in which it becomes impossible for the minorities to live in this region. The contribution of hardliners, fanatic and radical elements of Kashmir valley is equally responsible in inciting some youths on communal lines. Some Urdu newspapers of Kashmir valley have exploited the situation in Poonch and Rajouri on communal line and propagated for a separate region comprises of Poonch and Rajouri districts. It is fact that the people of Poonch and Rajouri have severe type of grievances with the leadership of Jammu who had never represented the aspirations of the people of these districts. They are visiting only during the election time to get the votes of the people. They failed to establish the link with the majority Muslim community of this area. There is a vacuum of relations and understanding between the leadership of Jammu and Poonch-Rajouri. Therefore, they are ignorant about the problems, miseries and suffering of the people of Poonch-Rajouri belt. This scenario has given birth to the idea of separate region for Rajouri and Poonch so that development could take place. Inspite of all the above facts the majority population of Poonch and Rajouri is not in favour of separation from Jammu province because of the similar social, cultural and linguistic characteristics with Jammu people as compared to the other regions of the state. Therefore, this is time for Jammu leadership to awaken and fulfills the urges and aspirations of the people of these twin districts so that the economic backwardness from this belt could be eradicated. This is very essential for the smooth relations of the communities within Jammu province. As stated above the people of Poonch and Rajouri districts are mostly comprise of Gujjar-Bakerwal tribes and Pahari speaking people including Hindu, Muslim and Sikhs. All these ethnic races have an unique type of historic, cultural and linguistic identities. Still they are neighbours since centuries, living in the same belt, villages, dhoks and meadows. However, the Gujjars and Bakerwals were given Schedule Tribe status in 1991 on the bases of vulnerable economic conditions. Same type of demand was raised by Pahari-speaking section which is yet to be considered. Therefore, there is resentment among Paharis on this issue. Ethnically these races have been polarized and severe rifts have emerged between the Scheduled Tribe and the remaining population during last twenty years. No efforts from government side have been made to bulge the differences between Paharis and Gujjar-Bakerwal communities rather during the election time the candidates use this tension to strengthen their vote bank. This tension can be worsened at any time. Therefore there is a need of some package or arrangement for the relief of those Pahari-speaking population to address their grievances without disturbing the Scheduled Tribe status of Gujjar and Bakerwal communities otherwise the rift between the ethnic groups shall widen in future and therefore, it will not be a healthy symptom for the people of the border belt of Poonch and Rajouri. WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE? The people of this region have always remained in the mainstream of national politics. There was no political alienation even during militancy period. No voices asking for separatism or autonomy emerged in this belt until 2008. However, after the happenings of August 2008, the fundamentalists and radical elements from the outside had tried best to setup a separatist political platform in this region. No doubt that the mainstream leadership is very strong, active and dominating the politics of the area. However the scattered separatists and radical voices emerged in Thanamandi, Surankote and Poonch area. In this initial stage, these voices are not very strong. But we must be conscious from such sections of the people that can create tension and chaos at any time in these districts as it happened in 2008. They must be dealt in a political manner. It is very essential to work for the restoration of old traditions of brotherhood on the basis of the sermons of Sufi saints and Darveshs who always preached love for mankind, tolerance, restrain and respect of every religion. There is a need of understanding and reconciliation among the religious communities. Let the NGOs, human rights activists, religious personalities and social workers come forward and start the journey of peace and reconciliation. On government side, efforts need to be made to strengthen the ties of communities to resore peace, happiness and harmony in the region. (IPCS) www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 21 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal Social Structure and Perceptions of Regional Disparities MAZAMMAL HUSSAIN MALIK he whole region of Rajouri and Poonch is populated with different religious and caste communities –drawn mainly from Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs –with deep rooted customs and traditional system. SocioCultural and Economic pattern of inhabitants of the region are mostly similar to each other. Hindu community is divided into four caste groups as practiced in Indian traditional caste system while the Muslims are rigidly stratified into four caste groups –Rajputs, Gujjars, Kashmiries and 'others'. They never practice exogamous pattern of marriage and are the staunch believer of caste system and allied practices. RAJPUTS: The term Rajput is derived from Sanskrit word “Rajputra” found in the Vedas, the Ramayana, and Mahabharata. It has been used by the warriors and the Rulers, with passage of time there were many kshatriyas. The primogeniture allowed only the oldest male offspring of a king to succeed him, the rest were known as Rajputra.The word Rajput is claimed to be a changed term of Rajputra. Gradually it became a caste. Rajputs regard themselves as being descended from the Vedic warrior class known as the Kshatriyas. The majority of Rajputs in Rajouri District are the Muslims and their origin is claimed from Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh. Though the Muslim faith is against belief of a person being born from sun, moon, T and fire, but even Muslim Rajputs feel proud of being from the Rajput Clan. They often make reference to the bravery of their ancestors in the battle fields of the past and extend equal status to the parallel clan that is Hindu Rajputs. At the time of any conflict with non Rajput communities, the Hindu and Muslim Rajputs communities emotionally unite to protect their prestige. They love to serve in armed forces. Rajputs of Rajouri-Poonch have been divided into two religious communities, ie, Hindu Rajputs and Muslim Rajputs. Hindu Rajputs have been classified into various sub castes like Thakers, Manhas, Chauhan Thakyal, Chandial, Charrak, Kamlak, and Chib; Muslim Rajputs have been further divided in to various sub castes such as, Jarral, Malik, Domal, Thakyal, Khokhar, Janjua, Salaria, Bhatti, Feerozal Gakhar, Manhas, Manial, Chib, Thakkar, and Kamlak etc. As such there are more than 54 sub-castes of Muslim Rajputs existing in the area. GUJJARS: The Gujjars are an ethnic group in India and Pakistan. In India, the Gujjars follow Hinduism, Sikhism and Islam. The Hindu Gujjars belong to the traditional Kishatriya Varna in Hinduism, while the Muslim Gujjars are considered to be a Potwari tribe in India and Pakistan. The historical background of the community is associated with the Rajputs clan of Rajasthan and Gujarat. In India Gujjar population is found in Delhi, Rajasthan, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, western Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, northern Madhya Pradesh, Utterakhand, Gujrat and Maharashtra. Gujjars in north India are now considered as vote bank by the different political parties. Rajesh Pilot was prominent Gujjar leader in north India, with his political support the Gujjars have been classified as a Scheduled Tribe in Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir, and as other backward classes in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. In Jammu and Kashmir the population is mainly concentrated in Rajouri and Poonch Districts, followed by Baramulla, Kupwara, Anantnag, Udhampur and Doda Districts. The Bakarwals is the Parallel ethnic group to the Gujjars, inter section marriage takes place freely among Gujjars and Bakarwals. All Gujjars of Jammu and Kashmir are the followers of Islam. While considering the sentimental attitude, physical features, racial and genealogical background of the Gujjars and Bakarwals, it is observed that the clan is purely a Rajput clan. But on account of the regional variation their recognition is different from that of the fact; they do not perceive themselves as Rajputs. Period of their conversion to Islam is treated to be the same as the conversion of the other Muslim Rajputs, of the area. Majority of the Gujars are illiterate due to which they can be exploited easily by their political leaders. The Major economy of the Gujars community is comprised of www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 22 Agriculture, government jobs, cattle rearing and few among them are rearing Sheep and goats and leading semi nomadic life, during winter they migrate with their herds to the foot hills of Peer Panchal, and in summer season in search of pasture they migrate to high up in the mountains. The Gujjars of Rajouri-Poonch are divided into innumerable sub-castes but major among them are, Dhakkar, Khatana, Badana, Sood, Paswal, Kalas, Benth, Bijran, Chauhan, Chechee, Sango, Rana etc. associated with the Rajputs clan of Rajasthan and Gujarat. KASHMIRIS: The term refers to the people who are inhabitants of the valley of Kashmir, but generally the term is used in its broader concept for the people of Jammu and Kashmir by the people of rest of India. But in Rajouri and Poonch Districts, Kashmiris are the people who speak Kashmiri language with Pahari language. A small section of the people in Rajouri district is speaks Kashmiri language. They reportedly migrated from valley of Kashmir to Rajouri and Poonch districts since the time immemorial, their major concentration of the community is observed in Thannamandi Tehsil of District Rajouri and Buffliaz, Chandhimarh and Loranmandi in District Pooch, as these are the adjoining Mountainous areas of Kashmir Valley. The old persons of the community are claiming themselves as traditional manual labourer working in the areas for centuries, majority of the community members leading miserable life in extreme poverty. Their historical background is similar to that of other Kashmiri Muslim in the valley of Kashmir as they had been converted to Islam from Kashmiri Pandhits. Caste stratification among the Kashmiries is not so rigid as among other Muslim communities of the areas. They have matrimonial relations with all the Muslims irre- Per Capital Net District Domestic Product for the Year 2002-03 (P) Rank 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 District Srinagar Leh Jammu Kathua Pulwama Kargil Baramulla Udhampur Anantnag Rajouri Poonch Budgam Doda Kupwara Per Capita Income at current prices 17896 17555 16323 16193 15406 14581 13997 13870 13868 13725 13049 12698 11573 9999 Rank 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 Agriculture Area sown more than once as %age of net sown area Rajouri Poonch J&K State 81.51 66.97 53.9 Cropping intensity Gross Area irrigated Gross Area irrigated as %age of gross area sown 8.51 14.48 41.45 District Pulwama Kathua Leh Jammu Rajouri Udhampur Poonch Srinagar Budgam Kargil Anantnag Baramulla Doda Kupwara Per Capita Income at current prices 9509 9328 8228 8198 8114 8042 7993 7815 7736 7504 7042 6837 6814 5407 181.51 166.97 153.9 Post Offices Area Sq.km 82.76 6691 471134 Population 4525 6814 7021 Rajouri Poonch J&K State 125 64 1691 21.04 26.16 .60 Banking District Average area Population per bank branch coverage per (sq. km) bank branch 64.15 79.71 14925 22467 13268 CD Ration 24.39 22.61 49.19 Perceptive BPL Plan population outlay 1206.97 1347.09 1053 25.1 33.67 21.63 Rajouri Poonch J&K State 104.74 www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 23 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal spective of the caste. They are liberal like Kashmiri Muslims and Kashmiri Pandhits. As such Kashmiri Hindus (Pandhits) are different from elsewhere. (Subash Kak, 1996). Major castes among Kashmiries are Bhat, Mir, Khawaja, Bhanday, Maghray, Khans Kandru, Itto, Muttoo and Sheikh. There are more than 130 caste titles of Kashmiries of the Valley of Kashmir but few among them are existing in the area under study. OTHER COMMUNITIES: - These communities are comprised of Sayeed, Qureshi, Mughal, Pathan and Sheikh (muslim banghi) and They are claiming their origin in golf countries. The caste structure of these communities is not similar to that of the whole Indian Muslims. In all the studies of caste among Muslims the term 'Ashraf' (Arabic words meaning honourable) is used for the Muslim of foreign origin and converts from Hindus of higher birth. And Risely (1908) in Bengal used the term 'Ajlaf' for the Muslims engaged in clean occupational group like, barber, carpenter, laundrymen, potter, tailor, and Rangrez. 'Arzal' for the Muslims engaged in unclean occupational groups like, Bhangi (scavenger), Cobbler (Mochi). In Rajouri and Poonch Districts except Sayeeds, 35% of the total population of these communities are originally belong to the Ashraf category of the Muslims, majority of the Ajlaf claiming themselves as Ashraf are the Muslim Dooms(drum beater) Mouchies (Cobbler) and Banghies (scavenger) using the title of Sheikhs with their names. The historical accounts refer that this section has been converted from untouchable Hindus due to the suppression of rigid caste system of Hindus and social disability. During the process of Islamization they changed their caste and claim themselves as Sheikh which is higher caste among Muslims in the whole of the country. Clean occupational group in Rajouri District claim themselves as Qureshi, Mughals and Thakkers, such as Barbars, carpenters, Black smiths, weavers, Muslim jewelers, etc, but in the real sense they have been converted from clean occupational Hindu castes. Their economic activities are confined to their traditional occupational system, still they use the out dated techniques in their activities due to which they are poor and lead miserable life. It is taken into consideration that four Muslim caste categories and Hindus as well as Sikhs are dwellers of the remote and hilly Districts, whose sociocultural affinity and language is binding strength of their cultural heritage. Which have been nourishing their age old secular out look, extending common culture, speaking common language, residing on the foothills of Panchal Range starting from Budhal to Muzaffarabad. They extend very peculiar familial pattern, marriage customs and rituals which are not observed in other parts of the State. FAMILY AND MARRIAGE PATTERN: The family as primary institution performs the same functions every where. But pattern of the family in one society is different from the other. The family pattern in Rajouri-Poonch is purely joint, male dominated, traditional and orthodox. Modern urbanization and industrialization has hardly impacted the family structure and values. On the basis of study of the Region, among 651 respondents majority of them(74%) practices joint family system, because (83%) of the population is comprised of Paharies and Gujars and their means of subsistence is agriculture, cattle rearing some among them are semi nomadic, this type of setup requires manual force.. In whole area the parental property is inherited only by the male members of the society. Majority of the respondents (93%) elicited that female members are not given importance in the familial or matrimonial decisions. Majority of the respondents (89%) expressed their views that they give preference to the male child birth instead of female child. Marriage among people of the Region is considered to be most important. These are performed according to the traditional rituals of each caste group. The marriage among the people is purely endogamous, inter caste marriage is considered as a serious threat, among four caste categories of Muslims. Gujars are purely endogamous, but in rear cases Rajputs (Male) can marry outside the caste but never give their girls to any of the other castes of the Muslims. In the past marriage proposals were initiated by the Barbers but with passage of time custom has been changed, and now friends and relatives perform the practice, the mate selection is made by the parents, and early marriage is a common practice among the people of Rajouri and Poonch Districts. The rate of divorce is very low among the people in the area. Matrimonial disputes are settled by the elderly members of the areas and few cases are settled by the courts. The study indicates that majority of the respondents (72%) prefer early marriage of their sons and daughters due to mass illiteracy, orthodoxy, outcaste threat and prevailing insecurity caused by militancy and allied factors, Majority of the respondents (97%) observe caste endogamous marriage, 02% to 05% of the marriages are performed by love or elopement. In the past polygamous pattern was also performed but major change has taken place in this custom, as only 2% to 3% of the people prefer more than one wife. Dowry system is very simple, majority of www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 24 the respondents (91%) expressed that they give buffaloes, cows, goats, sheep, spinning wheel and other domestic materials, where as, 09% of the population, imitate the modern practices of dowry system and spend major amount according to their income structure, Marriage bonds are maintained in accordance with the religious citations and social sanctions. They generally wear silver ornaments like jumka. Kangan, Sierie(necklace), long, Challa, Payal, but among some people the gold jewelry is considered as the status symbol. ECONOMIC CONDITION: - The Economic condition of the people of the District Rajouri is miserable and inadequate, according to census 2001, the major occupation is agriculture and allied activities due to the Geographical disadvantage, mass poverty and illiteracy the people are economically backward, the small farmers have little pieces of land holdings, kacha houses, most of the agricultural area is located on the hill slopes where irrigation and tractor facilities can not be availed. On the other hand due to snow fall only Kharief crop is possible in their fields, in addition to that there is lack of employment, and manual workers go outside the state in search of job. Major economy of the people is agriculture but it can be expected that a single source of income which cannot fulfill the basic amenities of a particular community does not deserve to be recognized as the economy of the community. On the basis of study, the whole economic structure of the districts is divided into four categories: (i) Population with Agricultural activities, (ii) Population with Government services. (iii) Population with cattle rearing, (iv) Manual labourer. 48% of the total working population is engaged in agriculture economy while, 13% of the working Population is engaged in government Agriculture District Rajouri Poonch J&K State Reported Area (ha) 253340 11381 2415801 Cultivable Area (ha) 54039 27918 803466 Cultivable Area as %age reported area 21.33 24.41 33.26 NREGA : Statement for the last two years as on ending December, 2008 & 2009 District 2008-09 Works executed Pulwama Kupwara Bandipora Shopian Budgam Sri nagar Ganderbal Kargil Anantnag Leh Baramulla Kulgam Jammu Samba Kathua Rajouri Poonch Reasi Ramban Kistwar Doda Udhampur Total 219 1797 54 58 169 5 87 440 632 55 47 347 1163 288 199 1238 1761 517 705 1309 1687 335 13112 Works completed 46 658 4 0 13 1 6 145 77 0 0 58 669 138 03 334 1582 193 546 950 1646 0 7069 2009-10 upto Jan 2010 Works executed 777 1406 265 293 495 38 224 370 1200 96 1088 607 2810 399 767 1970 2692 647 1027 1934 2127 736 21968 Works completed 187 489 16 71 133 12 165 89 424 28 174 206 269 115 102 978 756 221 423 1395 1076 192 7521 Estimated literary rate for 2009 (Excluding 0-6 population( Male Rajouri Poonch J&K State 59.19 62.54 67.89 70.76 71.11 74.96 Female 46.07 54.78 59.71 www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 25 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal services, where as, 23% of the total population depend upon cattle rearing, 16% of the total population is working as manual labourer. Among them 09% of the labourers are working outside the state, as, in Mumbai, Punjab, and H.P ., on account of non availability of work avenues in the State. The major portion of the youths is unemployed. The economy of the district is not satisfactory and more than 60% of the population is living below the poverty line. The youths of the area is badly effected by the prevailing limited economic resources7. Due to extreme poverty and unemployment some people even indulge in illegitimate sources of earning, either they smuggle forest wood, make local wine (in Khawas, doungi Grarti and some other areas) or join militancy in the State for their means of subsistence. E D U C AT I O N A L C O N D I T I O N : Educational condition of the Districts is not good though census figures of 2001 indicates the 57.65 literacy rate in Rajouri, it stands at the 6th place in the district wise literacy data, but it is expected less than this, and further decline is expected in the higher reaches. According to Education Department of J&K, (2007-08) the District has 1250 educational institution at primary level and 366 institution, at upper primary level. The people have not been encouraged to send their children to the school. Majority of the students cannot complete even their school education up to the 10th level, so dropped out from the school due to the financial constraints of the parents and uncertainty of future career. The data indicates that, 45% to 55% of the children's population of the District goes to school. Among them 48% of the children dropped-out from the school from first to middle class level, and female dropped out children constitute major- ity among them at the same level. The major causes of educational backwardness are their rigid Caste system, traditional beliefs, orthodoxy, extreme poverty and mass illiteracy and non availability of educational facilities. They prefer the children to graze the cattle in the field or (male children) to work as labourer and earn money to fulfill the basic needs of the family, instead of sending them to the school. They are not aware of the legal restriction on the child labour. HEALTH CONDITION:In the region majority of the people are suffering due to lack of health related facilities, the area has not been facilitated with the modern health care system, according to the survey of (EPOS health India 2004-05) In Rajouri there are 146 sub center, 40 PHCs,7 functional CHCs, and one District Hospital. More than 80% of the sub centers are without their own buildings, all the Medical sub Cs are with out public utilities for male and female and also without the toilet, labour rooms, telephone facility, even the PHCs are running in similar condition. The District Hospital is also ill equipped. The district health administration is divided in to four Medical blocks namely Sunderbani, Darhal, Kandi.and Nowshera one CHC in Nowshera which caters about 121627 populations, in block Darhal 2 CHCs which cater about 172460 populations, only one CHC in block Kandi which caters about 141000 populations. In the area more than 58% of the deaths cases are associated with Maternal- mortality (district Hospital record 2007-08). 84% of the deliveries in the hilly areas take place with out trained personnel (FMPHW), as in hilly areas Medical Termination of Pregnancy services are not available, due to which Infant Mortality rate is also very high. 81% of the women of the area are not aware of 'Woman and child' health care and the precautions, which are to be taken during pregnancy. Early marriage is also a cause which leads to increase in the maternal mortality rate. Some migratory labourers are the HIVAIDS infected under treatment at ART Center Medical College Jammu. PERCEPTION OF REGIONAL DISPARITY: The Jammu and Kashmir State of North India having area of 222,200 sq. km. including area occupied by China and Pakistan with 10,069,900 population (census 2001), its three cities are Jammu, Srinagar and Leh (Ladakh). The State has four types of unique cultural blend that differentiate it from the rest of the Country. The Socio-cultural and demographic structure of the State is roughly comprised of five distinct parts namely Jammu, Kashmir, Ladakh, Chenab Valley and Rajouri-Poonch. Zhese five regions have their own separate linguistic identity, Kashmir is represented by Kashmiri language, Jammu is represented by Dogri language Ladakh is represented by Ladakhi comprised of Balti, Dardi and Shina and Rajouri-Poonch is represented by Phari comprised of Gojri and Poonchi languages. For interregional interaction Urdu or Hindi is used as Communicative language. Though the four region of the State are different from each other in socio-cultural, ethnic, linguistic and demographical background but they have maintained the Indian tradition of unity in diversity. The regional disparity is the term, which indicates the developmental imbalance among regions or it may be said that regional disparity is the result of common efforts for the development of all the regions with out systematic evaluation of level of backwardness. Balanced regional development does not mean equal development of all the www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal 26 regions of the state or nation but it needs socio-cultural and economic development to its fullest potential so that the fruits of development can be shared by all the regions. It is generally considered that the existence of any community is closely associated with its racial, ethnic, social and regional history. (Sukhbir Tamang 2009) In so for as regional disparity of the area under study is concerned, it remained a battle field of various wars since the Paula Dynasty, it was more affected during the turmoil of 1947 and tribal raids. the prosperity of the region has taken its hugely turn witnessing heartrending episodes of genocide and mass exodus, moreover two wars of 1965 and 1971 have been fought in the region which effected socio-cultural and demographic structure of the region, besides wars majority of the population of the region has been the victim of cross boarder bullets, mines networking of the boarder areas, which lead to the loss of their lives, moveable and immoveable property. (Hasham Ali 2007) The on going movement in the Kashmir valley has also caused much havoc to the region. Since 1947 the region has long history of dejection, plethora of untold miseries and chronicle disparity being a neglected part of the state. The successive Governments in the State, political parties and other organizations are unable to perform expected role for the rehabilitation of aggrieved and neglected masses due to their own limitations, but exploit them on the name of castes and enhance the inter caste distrust. During recent past political turmoil in 1989 over 700 families comprising 6300 persons migrated from their respective areas and settled in different towns like Jammu, Rajouri and Nowshera, they have not been provided any relief including ration or cash for want of funds. The State Human Right Commission couldn't proved to be effective in the process of rehabilitation of the people of Rajouri and Poonch as more than 15 cases had been recommended by the SHRC to the State government to consider all the internal displaced persons of Rajouri-Poonch at par with the boarder migrants of the Jammu District as well as the migrants of Kashmir8. Following directives of the Supreme Court government agreed to facilitate the displaced but due to deficiency of funds assurance could never transformed in to the practice. All the organizations and social activists have failed to provide justice to the victims of terrorism and State apathy. In any political issues the people of the region have no space, the aspirations and opinions of the people are not taken in to account. Violation of human rights and atrocities on these people remain unnoticed and are not reported any where. The true representatives of the people of Kashmir and Jammu have never visited this area are completely unaware of the geographic, ethnic, linguistic and cultural composition of the State. Same is true with Government of India, in the process of maintenance of peace between India and Pakistan the interaction of youth of both the countries has been extended but youth of effected regions have not been involved in the process. The administrative data, of different departments, particularly the eco- Households, Household size and Household Services District Area No. of Households 81850 75253 6597 59644 55239 4405 1551768 1161357 390411 191963935 138271559 53692376 House hold size 5.9 6 5.1 6.2 6.3 5.4 6.5 6.6 6.4 5.4 5.4 5.3 Electricity 56384 49933 6451 33251 28989 4262 1250738 868341 382397 107209054 60180685 47028369 Latrine 18333 12543 5790 17908 14.37 3871 824602 485434 339168 69887599 30304359 39581440 Households services Sale drinking Availing water Banking service 23905 17920 5988 21348 17237 4111 10111589 638004 373585 149581740 101251117 48330623 31097 27061 4036 21372 18037 3335 566133 344778 221355 68230642 41639949 26590693 Without any specified assets 27643 26838 805 21135 20593 542 399767 362009 37758 66198648 55988658 10209990 Total Rajouri Rural Urban Total Poonch Rural Urban Total J&K State Rural Urban Total India Rural Urban www.epilogue.in Vol. 4, Issue 5 Epilogue, May 2010 27 In focus The Microcosm of Pir Panchal nomic survey of the State9 and primary survey of the investigator have indicated that Socio-cultural and economic condition of the region is relatively backward from other three regions of the State having mass illiteracy out dated customs, traditions and rituals, majority of the population is leading tribal way of life with rigid caste system. Modern governmental efforts, limited opportunities and external impact could not change the attitude of the people of the area. While examining the ethnocentric attitudes of the people of other two regions of Jammu and Kashmir it has been observed that majority of the people about 85% to 90% use the term 'Gujjar' to identify the people of Rajouri-Poonch, the term 'Gujjar' in J&K State refers to the victim of extreme poverty and social backwardness10. It is to be considered that when common man of the other regions has general perceptions of the regional backwardness of the area under study, so it does not require any technical rating scale to measure the regional disparity. In developmental aspects disparity can be observed when the work performance has been evaluated in context of roads connectivity of the areas, the roads which have been initiated in 1974 still could not become motor able, one among them is a road to connect R a j o u r i - Po o n c h H i g h w a y w i t h Thannamandi having only 21 Km distance. Where as most of the roads and allied facilities have been provided in the Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh areas. Rajouri-Poonch Mughal road leading to the Valley of Kashmir has some what similar history. The economic survey of the State for 2006-07 indicates that the road length per 100 sq. km., in Jammu District is 70.81 km; it is 34.17 km and 12.66 km in poonch and Rajouri districts respectively. In education sector, Jammu has 2,278 government and private run primary, middle, high and higher secondary Schools, where as, in poonch and Rajouri, the number is only 10,65 and 1,400, respectively. Due to which the rate in Jammu is 77% whereas it is 51.20% in poonch and 57.65% in Rajouri. In Jammu District five model villages have been created by the Government, where as, only one in poonch and two model villages in Rajouri have been established. In Jammu among 30,000 household 29000 are getting electricity and 28000 are getting drinking water, where as in Rajouri and poonch among 60000, only 34000 are getting electricity and 22000 are getting drinking water. When allocation of District funds are considered Rajouri-Poonch get meager funds in comparison of the other Districts of the State. The regional disparity is also observed in employment opportunity as admitted by the former chief Minister Mufti Mohammad Sayyed in march 2005 in the assembly session indicating that total strength of the administrative officers is 3,032 out of which 1, 23 were from Rajouri and Poonch, In other categories of Government jobs the region is lagging behind in comparison of other districts of the State. In University of Jammu only three faculties, (one each in education, law and economics Department) one Library Assistant and one computer Assistance (on contractual basis) representing 8, 56,000 population of Rajouri and Poonch indicated in census 2001. Major causes behind the fact is the mass illiteracy, unawareness, orthodoxy, traditional and rigid caste system which leads to the intra regional caste conflict, poverty and backwardness of the community and ineffective political approaches, irrelevant developmental programmes and policies, insincere efforts of the Government and political leaders. SOLUTION AND IMPLICATION: The Government of Jammu and Kashmir has tried to mitigate the regional disparity by providing scheduled tribe status in 1991, to a section of the society and also granted reservation for backward areas. The provisions have created intra regional conflict between ignored and reserved sections; it has created another problem which is threat to the unity of the region as well as the State. Thus pick and choose approach for a particular section for the developmental process has not proved to be successful, as the whole region is socially, educationally and economically backward. Regional disparity is a major problem it can take ugly turn until it is handled properly at the gross root level, as the Raj