Srinagar, Oct 15: Army has made it clear that Jammu and Kashmir State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) is not empowered to investigate alleged human rights violations against its soldiers posted in the State.

Reacting strongly to the Army’s contention, SHRC has said that it can act against any offender irrespective of rank and status. The Commission said that over the years it has taken up and even given recommendations in many cases of human rights violations involving Army.

Probing a complaint against Army for allegedly using civilians for forced labour in north Kashmir’s Kupwara district from 1990 to 2003, the SHRC had sought a report from the Secretary Ministry of Defence on the matter. The complaint was filed by MLA Langate Er Rasheed in 2009 alleging that 30 Rashtriya Rifles used people of 39 villages of Mawar area of Kupwara for forced labour to construct bunkers, extract timber and undertake night patrolling in the area.

In 2010 the then Director General of Police J&K after probing the complaint had established that people of these villages were used by Army for forced labour.

In its latest response to SHRC notice, Army through Srinagar based 15 Corps has not only refuted the allegations but challenged the jurisdiction of Commission over them.

“This is to inform you that the Ministry of Law and Justice has clarified that vide Para 5 of section 21 of the Protection of Human Rights Act 1993 read in conjunction with Para 24 (2) of the JK Protection of Human Rights Act 1997, Jammu and Kashmir State Human Rights Commission is not empowered to investigate complaints of alleged human rights violations against the Army being a subject matter of List 1 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution,” writes Colonel AR Chatterji, Colonel GS (HR) on behalf of the General Officer Commanding 15 Corps to the SHRC through State Home Department.

“Notwithstanding the above the Army has carried out a thorough investigation of the allegations and detected many inconsistencies. 30 RR the unit alleged to have used civilian for forced labour was inducted into J&K in March 1995. Hence the allegation that the Unit used civilians as forced labour from January 1990 to February 2003 is factually incorrect,” Colonel Chatterji writes in his letter to SHRC.

It states that affidavits of the complainants are almost sequentially numbered and dated May 2010. “This is more than seven years after the period of their being allegedly used for forced labour. Why this complainant (Er Rasheed) as an elected representative of the people of that area failed to take up the issue at an earlier date defies reason. We have apprised the Army headquarters of the complaint lodged in SHRC and inconsistencies in the contents clearly establishing the fact that it is a false and malafide,” Army maintains in the letter.

Constituted in 1997, the SHRC is governed by Jammu and Kashmir Protection of Human Rights Act 1997. By virtue of the Act the Commission can order investigations in cases of human rights violations and recommend measures for effective implementation of laws and safeguards provided by the Constitution to protect the human rights.

“We can act against any offender in J&K irrespective of rank and status. The argument of the Army that SHRC doesn’t have jurisdiction over human rights allegations against its soldiers is totally wrong. In the past as well we have taken cognizance of many cases including alleged Kunan Poshpora mass rape, Pathribal and Machil fake encounters directly involving Army,” SHRC member Rafiq Fida told Greater Kashmir.

“SHRC is a recommendatory body. After probing the allegations against Army or any other organization or individual we can only give recommendations. In Army’s case we can give them an option whether they want to face trial in civil or military court,” the SHRC member said.

During hearing of the case today, SHRC asked the MLA Langate Er Rasheed who is main complainant in the forced labour case to file rejoinder, if any, to the Army’s statement denying allegations against 30 RR.

Kunan Poshpora, a small village in frontier district of Kupwara, witnessed the mass rape - during the intervening night of February 23 and 24 in 1991, allegedly by the soldiers of 4 Raj Rifles of 68 Brigade.

After probing the case the SHRC last year had asked the Jammu and Kashmir Government to re-open the Kunan Poshpora mass rape case that sent shudders across the Valley in 1991.

The Commission had also recommended Rs 2 lakh compensation for each victim.

In the backdrop of the killing of three youth by Army in a fake encounter in Machil sector in 2010, SHRC had recommended a thorough probe into the possession of “unauthorized illegal weapons” lying with the accused Army unit.

In one of its judgments pronounced last year the SHRC had maintained that the Army personnel accused of committing human rights violations can’t get immunity under umbrella of laws including the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) and must face trial.

The judgment was pronounced by SHRC member Javaid Kawoos in a case of alleged custodial killing of a civilian of south Kashmir’s Islamabad district by Army personnel in 1994.

In his four-page judgment, the member had passed strictures against the accused armed forces personnel for “undermining the authority of law and exceeding their powers” and recommend to the senior Army officers to impart training on protection of human rights among its personnel.

“The framers of the Constitution have pleaded that there must be Rule of Law in the country, but quite contrary the present case makes a mockery of the same. This is highly painful and illegal and for such illegal acts, no immunity can be claimed because by no stretch of imagination the custodial disappearance of the subject can be termed as an act done in furtherance of duties of the accused officials,” the judgment read.

Chief Minister Omar Abdullah, who has been pitching for revocation of AFSPA in the State, has also been maintaining that the statute was not aimed at “protecting acts of crime by the armed forces.”

Lastupdate on : Mon, 15 Oct 2012 21:30:00 Makkah time

Lastupdate on : Mon, 15 Oct 2012 18:30:00 GMT

Lastupdate on : Tue, 16 Oct 2012 00:00:00 IST