





















8 Shares

SRINAGAR: Pro-India politician and independent legislator Abdul Rashid on Wednesday termed the 25 years of ‘self imposed’ migration of Pandits as a ‘period of picnic’ for the community during which it has been ‘availing economic benefits and packages from the Indian and state government’.

‘Real migration made thrice by Muslims of the Valley; there has been no discussion on it’

Talking to reporters at a press conference, Rashid said the Pandits had ‘forced the migration on themselves’. “The world knows that Pandits themselves left, and their migration was a well-planned strategy to exterminate Muslims from the Valley. The plan was to keep Muslims alone, bulldoze them freely and return back to capture their properties (sic),” Rashid said, adding that instead of staying with Muslims, they (Pandits) left them to be killed.

Rashid also said that the ‘real migration’ was made three times by Muslims of the Valley and there has been no discussion on it. “Security agencies made Jamat-e-Islami workers migrate from their ancestral places and move to other parts of the state for survival. Similarly, thousands of families in border districts of Poonch, Baramulla and Kupwara were also forced by security agencies to migrate to Pakistan, but nobody speaks for them. If Kashmiri Pandits are entitled to huge packages, jobs and other facilities why should not internally displaced Muslims and those forced to migrate to PaK be given the same?” he asked.

Rashid, who accused the Pandits of defaming Muslims, said they have been working as stooges of New Delhi in Kashmir for defaming Muslims and diverting efforts to resolve the Kashmir issue. “Of the Pandits, who call their self-imposed migration of a few people as ‘holocaust’, I ask what name they will give to one lakh Muslim martyrs killed by security forces? Instead of showing some respect, they work on an anti-Muslim agenda.”

“Pandits call Kashmir ‘matrbhoomi’ (mother land), but they left it so that Muslims can be killed. If Pandits have to return, they must behave and shun their anti-Muslim policy,” he added.

Bio

Social

Latest Posts

By: JUNAID NABI BAZAZ Junaid Nabi Bazaz has been a correspondent at Kashmir Reader since 2014. He has been reporting in Kashmir since 2010 and has worked with many regional newspapers and magazines. He has also written for contrbutoria.com, a division of The Guardian newspaper.













Share this: Twitter

Facebook

WhatsApp

Print

More

Google

