Srinagar: Hurriyat Conference (G) chairman Syed Ali Geelani on Sunday said if India’s would-be-Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s claims of “justice for Kashmir” were true then “it will be an act of welfare for India as well.”

In a statement here, Geelani said that though Modi was born in 1950, he will be aware of the tragedy of 1947 when only 72 days after the liberation of India and Pakistan from the forced occupation of Britain, New Delhi landed its troops in Jammu and Kashmir and “forcibly enslaved the comparatively weak and unarmed people.”

“Then India itself took this issue to UN where this international body also termed the occupation of Jammu and Kashmir as injustice and advocated that right to self-determination of the people of Jammu and Kashmir,” he said.

“Indian rulers and its first Prime Minister himself have promised the Kashmir people in parliament and in Lal Chowk Srinagar that India will not hold Kashmir forcibly with it and when situation will improve, Kashmir people will be given a chance to decide their future, which will be respected in any way. ‘If Kashmir people will not decide to remain with India then it will be definitely painful for me, but we do not favour forced marriages’,” he reminded Modi.

Geelani said that India has done injustice with the people of Kashmir by not fulfilling their promises and if future Prime Minister of India Modi is sincere about his promise of doing justice, then he should undertake to fulfill the broken promises and Kashmir should be given a chance to choose their future by holding plebiscite in this state.

The Hurriyat chief said that Modi expressed his sorrow for not contributing to the freedom movement of India, but he has a chance to understand the “freedom movement of Kashmir in its real perspective and give them their right to self-determination.”

“Indian judiciary has also miserably failed in providing justice to the oppressed people of Kashmir and Shaheed Mohammad Maqbool Bhat and Shaheed Mohammad Afzal Guru like sons of Kashmir have not only been hanged without completing the formalities of justice, but even their dead bodies were not returned to their families,” Geelani said, adding “If Modi is really serious in his promise of justice then first of all he should at least accept the injustice done with Kashmir people and then try to eliminate these injustices.”

Modi had said in his statement that ‘the new government will take decisions according to the wishes and aspiration of people’. “But time is the best judge. Kashmir people are in no way enemies of India or its people but they want that justice should be done with them and their rights should be respected.”

Share this: Twitter

Facebook

WhatsApp

Print

More

Google

