Jayaprakash Narayan pulled no punches — not even when it concerned Jammu & Kashmir (J&K), where the repeated murder of democracy made even the most fair-minded people look the other way. In the same vein, the socialist leader wrote to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1966 protesting ‘rule by force in Kashmir’, where he noted ‘we profess secularism, but let Hindu nationalism stampede us into establishing it by repression’. He maintained the problem there exists ‘not because Pakistan wants to grab Kashmir, but because there is deep and widespread discontent among the people.’

Narayan was referring to the discontent following the 1957 and 1962 elections, which he denounced as ‘anything but free and fair’. The elections were held after the most popular Kashmiri leader Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah was deposed in 1953 on flimsy grounds and jailed without charges. The Bharatiya Jana Sangh had launched an agitation against him that triggered a chain reaction which led to his downfall. Abdullah had stepped on some powerful toes with his land reforms and insistence on having Delhi deliver on its promises, including ‘digging the grave of communalism’, made to secure his help for J&K’s accession to India.

The miscarriage of democracy, which Narayan highlighted, was such that even internationally-acclaimed democrat Jawaharlal Nehru was forced to advice Abdullah’s successor, Bakshi Ghulam Muhammad, to lose ‘a few seats to bonafide opponents’ to strength his position in the 1962 elections. Narayan’s Praja Socialist Party had contested the 1962 polls on Nehru’s request after he pleaded ‘unopposed polls’ due to widespread rejection of nomination papers had given a ‘bad reputation’ to the Indian democracy. Nehru was though unapologetic about it: ‘We have gambled on the international stage on Kashmir, and we cannot afford to lose. At the moment we are there at the point of a bayonet. Till things improve, democracy and morality can wait.’

Narayan’s criticism was like water off duck’s back, as the 1967 elections were no different. As per the norm, more than half – 39 legislators – in the 75-member house were again elected uncontested while nomination papers of 55 candidates were rejected on flimsy grounds to ensure brute majority for the Congress with 60 seats. This practice forced B K Nehru, the J&K governor in the 1980s, to conclude the chief ministers from 1953 to 1975 were ‘nominees of Delhi’, whose appointments were ‘legitimised by holding of farcical and totally rigged elections’.

The 1977 elections are widely believed to have bucked the trend after Indira made Abdullah chief minister two years earlier by forcing Congress legislators to vote for him after he abandoned his plebiscite demand. The bubble was burst when Abdullah’s son, Farooq, who had succeeded him in 1982, was dismissed after he had dared to take on Indira two-years later by getting involved in forming an alliance to oppose her. Indira was replaced B K Nehru with Jagmohan as governor after he refused to dismiss Farooq, arguing it was unconstitutional. Jagmohan masterminded a split in Farooq’s National Conference by bribing its legislators before dismissing his government without allowing him to prove his majority.

Farooq learnt his lessons quickly and in 1986 got into an alliance with Indira’s son, Rajiv, who had succeeded his mother after her assassination, saying he had to ‘stay on the right side of the Centre to run the government in the state’. In a throwback to elections prior to 1977, the Congress-NC alliance blatantly rigged the elections in 1987. Opposition Muslim United Front activists were imprisoned and tortured. Many of them spearheaded the armed insurgency as Yusuf Shah (Syed Salahuddin), who had contested the elections, founded the Hizbul Mujahideen. The rigging was the spark that triggered the insurgency along with overbearing presence and manipulative nature of the deep state.

The credibility of electoral processes and democratic institutions as such has always been suspect in J&K. In this context, the BJP’s aggressive campaign to form the next government, relying on the combination of low turnout and displaced Kashmiri vote, is fraught with dangers. Many accuse the party of propping up groups and individuals to divide the vote towards this end. It becomes more complicated given the BJP’s troubled history with the Muslims, highlighted in its recent vicious anti-Muslim campaign ahead of bypolls in Uttar Pradesh. Has the party that changed the face of the Indian politics by the spearheading the movement for the Babri Mosque demolition at a great human cost changed its spots? It is still early days for most people to change their minds regarding the BJP, whose ideological forebears did not want even citizenship rights for the Muslims. In Kashmir, the party stokes fears of demographic change as well.

Many argue the BJP’s ambitions in J&K are welcome as it could lead to its drift towards centre-right and signal its willingness to reconcile with the state’s Muslim majority. The BJP’s policy of avoiding contentious issues like revocation of Article 370 and extraordinary statements like ‘Islam would prosper under its rule’ do hint at its preference for realpolitik. But it would take more than just rhetoric for the electorate to shed the baggage associated with the BJP. The party after all has been hitherto known in Kashmir for its aggressive yatras to push nationalism down Kashmiri throats.