“Democracy is more than a ballot box”

Mohamed El Baradei



New Delhi is jubilant and the Prime Minister Narindra Modi has started beating the drum, that people of Kashmir has defied the boycott calls by ‘separatists’ and has opted for democratic route to empowerment and good governance, as voters turned in large numbers to record over 70% of polling in the first and the second phase of polling in north and south Kashmir. In the past also Indian state has continuously argued that such elections are substitute for the promised ‘Plebiscite’, and as such, the people of Kashmir had to use the ‘Poll boycott’ as a tool of ‘Resistance movement’. The unexpected high voter turnout, this time has evoked considerable debate and analysis both in Kashmir and elsewhere. A number of political analysts are of the opinion that these elections thrusted after a ‘disaster’, with Delhi’s agenda of ‘Mission 44+’, do not represent a mandate for maintenance of political status quo in the Jammu & Kashmir. To understand the dynamics of this election, it is necessary to hold an appraisal in its historical perspective, as whether this ‘vote’ nullify our demand of right of ‘Self Determination’.

Since Indian independence, when Kashmir under the compulsive circumstances, in which it was placed then, became a part of Indian union, there has been conflict of political interests between Srinagar and New Delhi. The relationship of Jammu & Kashmir with Indian Union is based on the ‘Instrument of Accession’, which has given the people of the state the right of ‘self determination’ and right to ‘Self rule’. The ‘Instrument of Accession’ was proposed and signed by the Maharaja Hari Singh on 26th of Oct 1947 and was ‘provisionally’ accepted by Lord Mountbatten Governor General of India. The Accession having remained ‘incomplete’ has two most important features 1). The letter of acceptance dated 27 Oct. 1947, as a collateral document, forms an indispensable part of Accession and it reveals that the accession was termed as subject of ‘dispute’ making its acceptance ‘provisional’ subject to ratification by ‘reference to the people’. 2). Maharaja Hari Singh in accordance with the proposed terms of Accession, agreed to be part of Union of India, allowing it to make laws for this state only with respect to Defense, External Affairs and Communication. The Accession also vide clause 7 made it categorically clear that ‘Nothing in this instrument shall be deemed to commit mean any way too acceptance of future constitution of India or to fetter any direction to enter into arrangements with Govt. of India under any such future constitution’. Thus at the time of ‘Conditional Accession’ Jammu & Kashmir was the only state to declare its intention to have its own constitution, to be drafted by its own Constituent Assembly. The Government of India thus had agreed that ‘In view of the special problems arising in respect of this state and the fact that the Govt. of India have assured its people that they would themselves finally determine their political future’ hence for a ‘temporary period’ of time for running day to day affairs, a temporary special position should be accorded to the Jammu & Kashmir in future constitution of India so that, there shall be a division of sovereignty and beyond the power transferred by it to the union, the state shall enjoy complete sovereignty, with democratic right of its people to govern themselves. This is how the people of J & K have earned their right of ‘Self determination’ and right to vote for ‘Self Rule’. Soon after the Accession, India for the first time tried to use 1951 elections of the Constituent Assembly (in which out of 75 seats National conference won 73 unopposed) as a substitute for ‘plebiscite’. But the United Nation’s Security Council rejecting India’s claim, passed a Resolution 91 (1951), on March 30, 1951 which reads as “Affirming that the convening of a Constituent Assembly as recommended by the General Council the of the "All Jammu and Kashmir National Conference" and any action that Assembly might attempt to take to determine the future shape and affiliation of the entire State or any part thereof would not constitute a disposition of the State in accordance with the above principle. Observing that the Governments of India and Pakistan have accepted the provisions of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan resolutions of 13th August, 1948, and 5th January, 1949, and have re-affirmed their desire that the future of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be decided through the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the United Nations”. Thereafter again when the Constituent Assembly after ratifying state’s Accession to India, adopted the J & K constitution on 17th Nov. 1956, the United Nations Security Counsel passed another resolution No.122 (1957) on January 24, 1957 which reiterated that, the earlier U.N resolutions on Kashmir that called for a final settlement of the dispute “in accordance with the will of the people expressed through the democratic method of free and impartial plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the U.N.” Thus the 1951 and 1957 U.N resolutions deemed any constitutional change undertaken by India within Indian-administered-Kashmir as irrelevant to the resolution of Kashmir Conflict. If the holding of successive Assembly election in Kashmir and the participation of Kashmiri Muslims in them are considered markers of triumph of India’s claim that these elections are substitute for ‘Plebiscite’ then the establishment’s definition and understanding of ‘Kashmir dispute’ is exceedingly limited, if not dangerously flawed. In the recent past, India was proved on the wrong side of the history in the valley when on 18th Aug 2008, a million of Kashmiri Muslims took part in the extra ordinary peaceful demonstrations against the status quo symbolizing the thousand year old language of fearlessness, a language with no reservations and omissions, about the world and about the power.

The people of the Kashmir with their acknowledged political wisdom, are the best judges. They know when to act and how. The high turnout of voters in this election are believed to demonstrate ‘Mission Unity’ just to defeat the Delhi’s design of ‘Mission 44+’, which is making a frantic effort to install a ‘BJP Raj’ in Kashmir and alter the Muslim majority character of this state by abrogation of Article 370 and State Subject Laws. This election is not, and can never be, a substitute for just resolution to the six-decade old dispute between people of Kashmir & the Indian state. Elections in Kashmir merely affirm India as formal, rather than substantive democracy. If India is a true democracy, it must have the courage to face up to, and redress, its political failures in Kashmir. Democracy in Kashmir and indeed, in India can be best served by fulfilling the right of ‘Self Determination’ of the people of Kashmir, as promised by Pt. Nehru, on 18th November 1947 in Lal Chowk Srinagar.



(Abdul Qayoom Khan (IFS) Rtd. is Member All India Muslim Majlis - e- Mushawarat. Feedback at ayoomkhansnn@yahoo.co.in)

Lastupdate on : Thu, 4 Dec 2014 21:30:00 Makkah time

Lastupdate on : Thu, 4 Dec 2014 18:30:00 GMT

Lastupdate on : Fri, 5 Dec 2014 00:00:00 IST