Hizbul Mujahideen's 21-year-old poster boy Burhan Muzzafar Wani was shot dead by security forces along with two of his accomplices.

Militant outfit Hizbul Mujahideen's top commander Burhan Wani has been killed in an encounter along with two of his local accomplices in Jammu and Kashmir's Anantnag.

The police sources have identified two other militants killed in the encounter as Sartaj Ahmad Sheikh of Kokernag and Bashir Ahmad Lashkari of Sriguwara.

21-year-old Wani, who carried bounty of Rs 10 lakh on his head, was the most wanted Hizbul commander in the Valley.



SEPARATISTS CALL FOR BANDH

Immediately after the news of Burhan's death spread, pro-Pakistan slogans were heard in Srinagar with people coming out on the roads and burning tyres. Curfew like restrictions were imposed in the area.

Meanwhile, separatists have called for a three-day shutdown in Kashmir Valley. Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Omar Abdullah has also warned of tough days ahead.



Pro-Pakistan Hurriyat leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani has also given a call for bandh tomorrow as security agencies are preparing for a law and order situation which may arise in the Valley especially in his hometown Tral.



BURHAN WANI'S VIDEO GOES VIRAL



Few days back, Wani had issued a video warning in which he said that militants have no option but to attack local policemen supporting 'Indian occupation' in the Kashmir Valley. The 6-minute video has gone viral on social networking sites including Whatsapp and Facebook.

In another video, Hizbul terror boss was seen playing cricket in South Kashmir without any fear of the law.

He even minced no words, when he proclaimed that the Indian Army is Hizbul's prime enemy, warning cops not to target militants, and exhorting Valley's youth to join Hizbul Mujahideen's brand of jihad.

Alas Burhan isn't the 1st to pick up the gun & won't be the last. @JKNC_ has always maintained that a political problem needs pol. solution &; Omar Abdullah (@abdullah_omar) July 8, 2016

WHO IS BURHAN WANI

Burhan Wani, who belongs to south Kashmir's Tral, was seen as the new face of militancy in Kashmir.

Considered as a 'Poster Boy' of Hizbul Mujahideen terror group for wooing Kashmiri youths to militancy, Burhan had joined the militant outfit in 2010 when he was just 15 years of age.



He left home in 2010, days ahead of his Class 10 examination to join the Hizbul Mujahideen.

ALSO READ | No militancy related incident attributed to Burhan Wani, says Omar Abdullah

