Some Indian Ocean islands could have been made permanently uninhabitable by the salt water that flooded them during the devastating Asian tsunami of 26 December.

Water experts are now warning that, in the long run, the salt invasion may prove almost as destructive to the land as the tsunami itself. It could leave some communities dependent on outside aid for food and water for months or years to come.

There are widespread reports from across the stricken region that seawater has filled wells, invaded the porous rocks on which communities depend for water, and poisoned soils. Even as far away as Somalia in east Africa, hundreds of wells used by coastal villages are now poisoned with salt or have been buried by sand washed inland by the giant waves.

Dozens of coral atolls in the Maldive Islands south of India were completely overwhelmed by the waves, which poisoned all of their underground water reserves with salt. “On 17 or 18 islands there is literally no [drinkable] water at all. They are having to bring it in by ship,” a World Health Organization official told the New York Times.

Advertisement

Communities will have to wait for rains to flush out aquifers, the permeable rocks that hold groundwater. But the WHO says that for some, especially on small atolls, it could be a very long wait. The British Geological Survey says that, in the worst cases, the aquifers may be “unusable for many years”.

Killing contaminants

Patrick Fuller of the Sri Lanka-based International Water Management Institute warns that “saline intrusion of wells is certainly a problem. Many communities along the coastal belt in the south and east rely on open wells for drinking”.

“To treat wells properly, the salt water needs to be pumped out and then the wells should be chlorinated to kill contaminants,” he told New Scientist. “This should certainly be a top priority.”

However, this approach will not always work. If the seawater filled wells without contaminating the rocks from which the wells draw their water, then it could be successfully pumped out. But if the sea has penetrated the aquifers themselves, then it may take years or decades for monsoon rains to wash the rocks clean. And in some places it may never happen.

Catching the rains

While they are waiting, people will have to rely on imported water, expensive desalination plants or simply catching the monsoon rains.

Ironically, in many places, the dependence on wells results from past aid efforts. Since the 1980s, aid agencies have persuaded millions of communities across the region to abandon traditional surface-water sources in favour of new wells to tap safer underground water.

In Sri Lanka, salt has poisoned thousands of rice farms and plantations of bananas and mangoes. It is already forming a crust on fields as they dry out. “The fields that these people rely on are beyond use for at least another year or two because they have received so much salt water,” said Gordon Weiss of UNICEF, the UN children’s agency.

But Chellaiya Dayananda, an agricultural official in east Sri Lanka, is more pessimistic: “It will probably take a decade to turn any of these lands along the shore into farms again.”