FIELD SURVEYS OF 2004 INDIAN OCEAN TSUNAMI

FROM SUMATRA TO EAST AFRICA

Hermann M. Fritz

1

, Jose C. Borrero

2

, Costas E. Synolakis

2

and Emile A. Okal

3

,

1

Civil & Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,

Savannah, GA, USA

2

Civil & Environmental Engineering, University of Southern California,

Los Angeles, CA, USA

3

Geological Sciences, Northwestern University,

Evanston, IL, USA

ABSTRACT

On Sunday December 26th at 00:58:53 UTC, a great earthquake with a mom ent

magnitude of 9.0 – or possibly greater (Stein and Okal, 2005) – occurred 250 km

southwest of the North tip of Sumatra, Indonesia. Large tsunam is were generated and

severely damaged coastal comm unities in countries along the Indian Ocean, including

Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka, India, Mald ives and Somalia (Titov et al., 2005). The

tsunami death toll is estimated at 300,000.

The authors covered most diverse coastlines impacted by the m ega tsuna mi fr om th e

near to the far field encompassing Suma tra (Indonesia), Sri Lanka, The Maldives,

Somalia, The Sultanate of Oman (Okal et al., 2006), Madagascar (Okal et al., 2006),

Reunion Island, Mauritius and Rodriguez Isla nds (Okal et al., 2006). A variety of

standard tsunami field survey techniques (Okal et al., 2002) were used. The survey

teams measured local flow depths based on the location of debris in trees and

watermarks on buildings. The maxim um ts unami height on flat terrain and the

maximum run-up on steep shores were determined relative to the sea level at tsunami

impact. Each watermark was localized by means of global positioning systems (GPS)

and photographed. Further inundation dist ances and areas of inundation were

documented. Numerous eyewitness interviews were recorded on video to estim ate the

number of waves , their height and period as well as the tsunami arrival tim e. In addition

overland flow velocities were determined from eyewitness video recordings based on

rectified Particle Image Velocim etry (PIV).

In the near field of the epicenter, Su matra was hardest hit by the tsunami (Borrero

2005). The tsunami severely affected Sri Lanka across the Bay of Bengal at a distance

of 1600 km from the epicenter or at a th ird of the distance between Sum atra and

Somalia along the westward path of the ts unami. The authors surveyed both the south

and southwest coasts of Sri Lanka as a sub-team of an International Tsunami Survey

Team (ITST) during the period January 10 through January 14, 2005 covering some

250 km of coastline between the capital Colombo and Ham bantota (Liu et al., 2005).

An hour after Sri Lanka the Maldives were hit by the tsunami at a distance of 2500 km

from the epicenter or at half way point be tween Sumatra and Som alia along the path of

the tsunami. Subsequent to the Sri Lanka surv ey the team surveyed a total of 6 heavily

damaged islands on 5 different atolls spread over 400 km – including the Islands

Vilufushi and Madifushi (Thaa-atoll) , Kolhufushi (Meemu-atoll), Kandholhudhoo

(Raa-atoll), Eydhafushi (Baa-atoll) and Hinnava ru (Lhaviyani-atoll). Most islands were

completely flooded by the tsunami due to their low lying land. At first glance the

archipelago with a maximum elevation of 2 m above sea level appears extrem ely

vulnerable. However reports indicate a relativ ely small num ber of 82 casualties (Fritz et