Here is a breakdown of the $7 billion plus that has been pledged so far:

Japan

$500m (£264m) in government donations, half of which Tokyo has promised to make available immediately in direct grants. $70m of the aid has been allocated to Unicef and $60m to the UN World Food Programme. 120 civilian emergency workers were sent to tsunami-hit countries.

United States

$350m in government donations, although this is expected to rise to $650m. Washington also sent military assistance involving 12,600 personnel, 21 ships, 14 cargo planes and more than 90 helicopters. Around $200 million of private donations, with $120m donated to the US branches of the Red Cross, Oxfam and Save the Children, and to Catholic Relief Services.

Norway

$183m in government donations, (approximately $39.50 per citizen), plus an estimated $30m raised in private donations.

FROM THE WORLD'S POOREST Russian town of Beslan - scene of a bloody school siege last year - pledged 1m roubles ($36,000) from the fund set up after the mass hostage-taking Mozambique - one of the world's poorest nations - has donated $100,000 Nepal and East Timor have also pledged donations

Italy

$95m in government aid. Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has contributed $7m from his personal fortune. Six to eight police forensics specialists have been sent to Thailand to help to identify bodies. Public donations totalling $20m had been collected by New Year's Day.

Sweden

$80m in government donations, of which around $20m has been disbursed, plus at least $75m in private donations including money raised during two telethons.

Denmark

$75m in government aid. Copenhagen has sent a field hospital, transport vehicles and a ship to the UN aid effort, Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen has said.

Spain

$68m in government donations, and a medical team has been sent to Sri Lanka.

France

$66m in government donations, plus an estimated $90m raised in private and business donations. A medical team has been sent to Sri Lanka.

Canada

$343m in government donations, plus at least $75m raised in private donations. Ottawa has already placed a moratorium on debt from the affected countries. It is also deploying its highly-specialised Disaster Assistance Response Team to Sri Lanka.

China

$83m in government donations, plus $1.8m donated to the Chinese Red Cross.

South Korea

$50m in government aid. The prime minister's office said the funds would be spent on rehabilitation of the devastated areas over the next three years. Private donations have reached nearly $13m, the South Korean foreign ministry says.

North Korea

North Korea has pledged $150,000 to the aid effort in Indonesia.

Australia

The Government has raised its offer of aid to $764m over five years. Half of this sum is in bilateral loans. Prime Minister John Howard has been sceptical about supporting the debt relief initiatve being pushed by other wealthy countries. Donations from the Australian public total $77m. About 350 military staff, four military helicopters, a troop transport ship, a military health support team and a water purification plant are being sent to Indonesia, as well as a team of volunteer medical professionals.

Netherlands

$34m has been donated by the government as emergency aid. A further $259m has been allocated for reconstruction. Aid groups say a further $35m has been raised in private donations. A Dutch police identification team has been sent to Thailand.

Russia

Around $10m in government aid to be distributed over the first half of the year. Moscow is sending additional aid, including grain and water purifiers.

Germany

Berlin has raised its government aid to $647m over three years. Germany is also sending a mobile hospital to Aceh and a military ship with two helicopters, aid supplies, water treatment equipment and an operating theatre on board. The public have donated an estimated $586m.

Qatar

$25m in government aid. Qatar is also sending food, medical and logistical supplies to affected countries.

International organisations

World Bank

$250m diverted from existing programmes to cover emergency needs while longer-term reconstruction needs are assessed.

European Union

$628m in reconstruction and humanitarian funds, of which $130m is humanitarian aid. This brings the total sum donated by the bloc (the EU plus its member states) to roughly $2bn.

IMF

The IMF has offered up to $1bn in financial assistance to afflicted countries. It has also extended the schedule of Sri Lanka's debt repayments, which will have the effect of reducing interest payments by about $114m this year.

Asian Development Bank

$500m has been allocated to Indonesia, Sri Lanka and the Maldives in the form of grants and highly concessional funds. The bank says up to $175m more could be diverted from ongoing programmes.

Countries in the region

India

The Indian government has outlined a $600m reconstruction package for the tsunami-affected regions in India. The military staged its biggest relief operation ever in Sri Lanka, the Maldives and Indonesia. This involves at least 16,000 troops, 32 navy ships, 41 aircraft including at least 16 helicopters, several medical teams and a mobile hospital. The air force has so far lifted 10,000 tonnes of relief supplies.

Bangladesh

Bangladesh has dispatched 111 soldiers to Sri Lanka and the Maldives, with a further 46 expected to join them. Two planes and two helicopters will carry the troops together with aid supplies.

Pakistan

Pakistan has 500 military staff in medical and engineering teams in Indonesia and Sri Lanka.

Afghanistan

Afghanistan has pledged to send around a dozen medics and a planeload of medicine and equipment to India and Sri Lanka. Citizens have also donated blood.