Tools

THREE weeks on from the tsunami that battered 12 Asian countries, the extent of the destruction is well documented. But as families, aid agencies and governments struggle to repair shattered lives, it is clear that the waves have redrawn more than coastlines. Settlements in the worst affected regions will be transformed, and the survivors will be dealing with the fallout for years or decades to come.

Perhaps the clearest picture of the overall destruction comes from the US National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, which has had a team of analysts poring over satellite photos of the region. Though the agency has not yet calculated the total area inundated by the tsunami, its images show that in many places the waves reached up to 2 kilometres inland.

"I would say conservatively that at least 50 or 60 per cent of the bridges and roads there are unusable, and it could be much beyond that," NGA analyst Michelle Hansen told New Scientist. "I've specialised in disaster response, and this is the largest one I've ever dealt with. I don't have a frame of reference for it."

But the physical destruction and the death of more than 150,000 people are only the most immediate impacts. Many times that numer of survivors will now be vulnerable to disease, and many will not be able to return to their land. "Experience in the Pacific has shown that agricultural lands can suffer long-term damage," says Neil Britton of Japan's National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention. "If the salt has entered the water table it could make places uninhabitable for decades."

The impact will be felt most acutely by island communities. From the Maldives to India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands, refugees have had to abandon islands occupied for thousands of years. Their governments are saying they may never return. Chaura Island, for example, is now deserted after its 1300 Nicobarese inhabitants were evacuated on 3 January. Their island was so badly swamped that the cemetery was washed away and coffins were left floating in the water.

Inhabitants of coral atolls face the least certain future because fresh water supplies there are so precarious. Most rely on rainwater that collects in the pores of limestone rocks, forming shallow lens-shaped aquifers that sit on top of larger amounts of salt water. Islanders tap the water with shallow wells or even trenches.

The World Health Organization reports that many islands in the Maldives now have no fresh water. "In the worst cases, the aquifer may be unusable for many years, until rainfall has re-established a coherent freshwater lens," says John Chilton of the British Geological Survey in Wallingford, Oxfordshire. But by the time the aquifers recover, island communities will have left, often for good.

In Sri Lanka, Patrick Fuller of the Colombo-based International Water Management Institute said saline contamination of wells is also a major problem. "To treat wells properly, the salt water needs to be pumped out and then the wells should be chlorinated to kill contaminants." But pumping out will not work if the salt has contaminated the wider aquifer, he says. Even in distant Somalia, hundreds of wells used by coastal villages have been contaminated with salt or buried by sand washed ashore by the giant waves.

“ Aboriginal peoples have abandoned islands they have occupied for thousands of years. They may never return ”

Agriculture has also been badly hit. Across the region, fruit trees and crops such as rice have been either physically destroyed or poisoned by salt. Last week local agricultural officials in Sri Lanka said it would probably take a decade to return farmland to production. But others on the island were more optimistic. Fuller says salt damage to soils may be marginal. "Where there has been contamination, the monsoon rains will help to flush out any salt deposits," he says.

The tsunami may also hasten the demise of the six aboriginal tribes living on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands who until now have had virtually no contact with the outside world. Members of the Shompens and Great Andamanese tribes were airlifted from their islands to safety, and it is unclear when they will be able to return, if ever. The most independent of the aborigines - the 200 or so Sentinalese on North Sentinal Island - appeared well, when they were spotted by helicopter. But their reputation for attacking anyone who lands on their island has ensured that they have otherwise been left alone.

Meanwhile, all talk of rehabilitating livelihoods depends on there being enough survivors. It seems that in parts of Sumatra, so few people survived the sea's onslaught that the land may be abandoned for decades to come. "In Aceh, it doesn't look like there was much that was spared," says Fuller, "whether it be soils, vegetation, water or people."

From issue 2482 of New Scientist magazine, 15 January 2005, page 14