(CNN) Belgian authorities searched through the night, looking for suspects who escaped after gunfire interrupted a raid of a building tied to last year's deadly terrorist attacks in Paris.

One suspect died and four police officers wounded in the raid. Belgian police fear that two people are on the run following the operation in Brussels earlier Tuesday, a senior Belgian counterterrorism official told CNN.

A CNN crew arriving at a train station in the Belgian capital noticed a large police presence and heard helicopters over the area where the raid took place.

On Tuesday evening, Belgium Prime Minister Charles Michel told reporters that police operations were ongoing in the neighborhood.

Police went to search a presumably empty apartment Tuesday afternoon in southern Brussels, only to have people inside begin shooting at them, the counterterrorism official said.

A witness in Forest -- the southern Brussels district where the raid occurred -- heard about 30 shots early in the confrontation, including some from a suspect firing what appeared to be a rifle at police.

"I ended up in the middle of terror here in Brussels," the man said.

Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism A Nigerian policeman inspects the site of a suicide attack by Boko Haram at a busy cattle market in the northeastern Nigerian city of Maiduguri in June, 2015. Boko Haram overtook ISIS as the world's deadliest terror group last year, according to the Global Terrorism Index, while Nigeria had the biggest year-on-year increase in terrorism, with deaths up more than 300%. Hide Caption 1 of 6 Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism In this image taken from social media, an ISIS fighter holds the group's flag as he stands on a tank, purportedly captured when they took over the town of Qaryatain, Syria. ISIS, along with Boko Haram, is one of two groups accounting for 51% of claimed terrorism deaths in 2014. Hide Caption 2 of 6 Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism A member of the Iraqi security forces fires ammunition in Baghdad in 2014 during a funeral procession of an Iraqi politician. The deadliest city in the world for terrorism is Baghdad. There were 2,454 deaths in Baghdad in 2014, with a death rate from terrorism of 43 per 100,000 people. Hide Caption 3 of 6 Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism Iraqi counter-terrorism forces patrol a street in Tikrit in April 2015, a day after the country's prime minister declared victory in the battle to retake the city from ISIS. Hide Caption 4 of 6 Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism An Iraqi Kurdish Peshmerga fighter prepares an ammunition belt as he guards a position at the frontline of fighting against ISIS militants near the northern Iraqi town of Sinjar. Hide Caption 5 of 6 Photos: Political violence is driving terrorism A Syrian family waits after arriving on the Greek island of Lesbos along with other migrants and refugees, on November 17, 2015. Ten of the 11 countries most affected by terrorism also have the highest rates of refugees. Hide Caption 6 of 6

Three police officers -- including a French police woman -- were wounded in an initial burst of gunfire, with a fourth hurt later. Two of them were treated and released from a hospital, Deputy Prime Minister Jan Jambon said.

South Brussels police spokeswoman Marie Verdete initially indicated that three officers suffered slight injuries in two shootouts in the same building, which is along Rue du Dries, a small and typically calm road.

Police searching for explosives and weapons found the body of a suspect who had been barricaded inside, said Eric Van der Sypt, a spokesman for Belgium's federal prosecutor. A Belgian federal prosecutor said the suspect, who had a Kalashnikov rifle, was killed by a Belgian police sniper.

It will take some time to identify the body, Van der Sypt said, but a preliminary examination indicates it is "most probably not" suspected Paris attacker Salah Abdeslam

Belgium a focus after Paris attacks

It's unknown what connection Tuesday's raid has to the November 13 carnage in Paris. Belgium has been a focal point for investigators.

ISIS claimed responsibility for the suicide bombings and gunfire that left at least 130 people dead and hundreds wounded.

Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A forensic scientist works near a Paris cafe on Saturday, November 14, following a series of coordinated attacks in Paris the night before that killed scores of people. ISIS has claimed responsibility. Hide Caption 1 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Police are out in force November 14 near La Belle Equipe, one of the sites of the terror attacks. Hide Caption 2 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Forensic police search for evidence inside the Comptoir Voltaire cafe after the attacks. Hide Caption 3 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Shoes and a bloody shirt lie outside the Bataclan concert hall on November 14. Most of the fatalities occurred at the Bataclan in central Paris. Hide Caption 4 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Security forces evacuate people on Rue Oberkampf near the Bataclan concert hall early on November 14. Hide Caption 5 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Medics evacuate an injured woman on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire near the Bataclan early on November 14. Hide Caption 6 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Police, firefighters and rescue workers secure the area near the Bataclan concert hall on November 14. Hide Caption 7 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A man with blood on his shirt talks on the phone on November 14. He is next to the Bataclan theater, where gunmen shot concertgoers and held hostages until police raided the building. Hide Caption 8 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Police officers patrol the area around Notre Dame cathedral in Paris on November 14. Hide Caption 9 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Police officers patrol Paris' Saint-German neighborhood on November 14. Hide Caption 10 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Victims of the shooting at the Bataclan concert venue in central Paris are evacuated to receive medical treatment on November 14. Hide Caption 11 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A woman is evacuated from the Bataclan theater early on November 14. Hide Caption 12 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Forensics are working in the street of Paris after the terrorist attack on Friday, November 13. The words "horror," "massacre" and "war" peppered the front pages of the country's newspapers, conveying the shell-shocked mood. Hide Caption 13 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Rescuers evacuate an injured person near the Stade de France, one of several sites of attacks November 13 in Paris. Thousands of fans were watching a soccer match between France and Germany when the attacks occurred. Hide Caption 14 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A survivor of the terrorist attack in the Bataclan is assisted following terror attacks, November 13. The violence at the Bataclan, which involved a hostage-taking, resulted in the highest number of casualties of all the attacks. Hide Caption 15 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Spectators invade the pitch of the Stade de France stadium after the international friendly soccer match between France and Germany in Saint-Denis. Hide Caption 16 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Spectators embrace each other as they stand on the playing field of the Stade de France stadium at the end of a soccer match between France and Germany in Saint-Denis, outside Paris, on November 13. Hide Caption 17 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A body, covered by a sheet, is seen on the sidewalk outside the Bataclan theater. Hide Caption 18 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Rescuers evacuate an injured person on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire, close to the Bataclan concert hall in central Paris. Hide Caption 19 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated outside the scene of a hostage situation at the Bataclan theater in Paris on November 13. Hide Caption 20 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A medic tends to a wounded man following the attacks near the Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire. Hide Caption 21 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A woman walks past police and firefighters in the Oberkampf area of Paris. Hide Caption 22 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A riot police officer stands by an ambulance near the Bataclan concert hall in central Paris. Hide Caption 23 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated outside the Bataclan concert hall. Hide Caption 24 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Police secure the Stade de France in Saint-Denis, north of Paris, following explosions during the soccer match between France and Germany. Hide Caption 25 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks A wounded man is evacuated from the Stade de France in Saint-Denis, outside Paris. Hide Caption 26 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Spectators gather on the field of the Stade de France after the attacks. Explosions were heard during the soccer match between France and Germany. Hide Caption 27 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks French security forces rush in as people are evacuated in the area of Rue Bichat in the 10th District of Paris. Hide Caption 28 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks People leave the Stade de France after explosions were heard near the stadium during a soccer match between France and Germany on Friday. Paris Deputy Mayor Patrick Klugman told CNN President Francois Hollande was at the match and was evacuated at halftime. Hide Caption 29 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Victims lay on the pavement outside a Paris restaurant. Hide Caption 30 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks Rescue workers and medics tend to victims at the scene of one of the shootings, a restaurant in the 10th District. Attackers reportedly used AK-47 automatic weapons in separate attacks across Paris, and there were explosions at the Stade de France. Hide Caption 31 of 32 Photos: Night of terror: Paris attacks French security forces move people in the area of Rue Bichat in the 10th District. A witness told BFMTV that firefighters were on the scene to treat the injured. Hide Caption 32 of 32

European investigators focused intently on Belgium, especially Brussels, on the heels of the attack.

Earlier this year, a senior Belgian counterterrorism official told CNN that two terrorist operatives phoned in orders from Brussels to those directly involved in the Paris attacks.

These two had an even more integral role than Abdelhamid Abaaoud -- the man long identified as the ringleader of the attacks -- according to the official.

Attack suspect not target of latest raid, sources say

Yet others with Belgian connections and ties to the November 13 attacks remain at large.

They include Abdeslam, a Belgian-born French national who lived and spent time with Abaaoud in a Belgian prison. The trail for Abdeslam, one of the few alleged Paris attackers to escape alive, went cold in December, according to a senior European counterterrorism official.

Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 1 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 2 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 3 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 4 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 5 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 6 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 7 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 8 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 9 of 10 Photos: Paris attack suspects: What we know Hide Caption 10 of 10

French sources close to the investigation said Abdeslam was not the target of Tuesday's raid. (French police were part of that operation, according to those sources.)

There are many reason authorities investigating the Paris attacks are in Belgium. Many of those tied to the Paris attacks live in the country, and they're believed to have met there before lashing out.

There is concern more individuals from the same place may be ready to launch other attacks.