Police found his mobile charging next to Haddadi’s bed and inside a photo of Abid by his side taken 30 minutes previously, the documents reportedly show.

However, Tabaouni remained on the loose in Europe for the following seven months, despite posting regular pictures on Facebook from Belgium, where he was finally arrested in Brussels in July, the documents reveal.

While he was on the loose, Tabaouni was openly using a Facebook account that is identified in the documents by its unique ID number and was publicly posting updates from Belgium, where he was arrested. None of his postings give away his terrorist leanings.

Jean-Charles Brisard, president and chairman of the French Centre for the Analysis of Terrorism, who reviewed the documents, said that while it was “surprising” he managed to remain on the loose for so long, “there are perhaps others”.

“These individuals were in contact with other people. The inquiry is still underway and we could well have other surprises concerning other suspects linked to the Paris and Brussels attacks that have, for a variety of reasons, not yet been arrested.”

Mr Brisard said the documents suggest that among recruits returning from Syria, Isil apparently had trouble finding operatives willing to attack Britain. “It clearly appears from interrogations that Islamic State was finding it hard to find operatives to strike Germany or Britain – that there were less candidates when compared to France or Belgium,” he told the Telegraph. “However, they were actively pursuing this avenue.”

Haddadi and Usman, who was identified by investigators as a suspected bomb maker for the Pakistani terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba, set out from the capital of the self-declared Isil caliphate in Raqqa, Syria, six weeks before the Paris attacks.

They travelled with Ahmad al-Mohammad and Mohamad al-Mahmod, who would later blow themselves up outside the national stadium in Paris. All four crossed the border from Syria into Turkey in early October and headed for the Turkish coast.

The four men were kept in the dark about each other’s real names or their final mission, the documents show.

Their journey was coordinated by a shadowy Isil leader in Syria, known only as Abu Ahmad and they communicated using encrypted phone apps like Telegram and WhatsApp.

After crossing to Greece in a refugee boat, Haddadi and Usman were arrested for possessing fake Syrian passports and held for a month, scuppering their chances of taking part in the bloody Paris attacks.

When they were finally released, they made their way to Salzburg, arriving on the day after the Paris atrocities and applied for asylum. They were arrested on the December 10, the day Tabouni arrived at the refugee centre to join them for a new terrorist mission, investigators believe.

The documents show that Usman frequently dabbled in a decidedly un-Islamic hobby -- using his phone to peruse almost two dozen X-rated sites, including "sexxx lahur" and "Pakistani Lahore college girls ... ImakeSex."

After interrogating suspects and gathering intelligence, CNN said that European investigators now believe that Isil initially planned for the operatives it sent last year to also attack the Netherlands, as well as other targets in France including shopping areas and possibly a supermarket in Paris.

The revelations came amid reports that armed guards in civilian clothes will be patrolling France's trains from October, as a new law comes into effect following a foiled terror attack last year.

The move has been planned since August last year when train passengers overpowered a man who had opened fire with a Kalashnikov on a train between Amsterdam and Paris. Their presence is akin to the presence of “sky marshals”, plain clothes officers who are based on certain flights, particularly on US airlines.

The guards will be on patrol in pairs on regional trains, TGVs, and even on commuter lines.