CLOSE A California college student killed in the Paris terrorist attacks was at a restaurant with fellow Long Beach students when she was fatally shot. The parents of 23-year-old Nohemi Gonzalez said on Saturday they had held out hope she was alive. (Nov. AP

This undated family handout photo issued by the Foreign & Commonwealth Office on Saturday Nov. 14, 2015 shows Nick Alexander of England. Nick Alexander, one of the victims of the attacks in Paris, was working at the Bataclan concert hall selling merchandise for the performing band. (Photo: AP)

Grieving families, foreign governments, French police and shocked friends on Saturday began confirming the names of those who died in the terror attacks that left at least 129 dead in Paris.

Many of the victims had been enjoying what they thought was going to be the beginning of a crisp fall weekend in Paris, visiting cafes, a soccer match, attending a concert, or sightseeing on streets in the picturesque 10th arrondissement on the right bank of the River Seine.

So far, one American has been confirmed among the dead — Nohemi Gonzalez, 20, a junior at California State University in Long Beach. She was dining with fellow Cal State Long Beach students at a Paris restaurant when she was killed, the Los Angeles Times reported. She was taken away on a stretcher but did not survive her injuries.

She was attending Strate College of Design in Paris during a semester abroad.

"Yesterday I lost the most important person in my life," Tim Mraz, described as Gonzalez' boyfriend, wrote on Instagram. "She was my best friend and she will always be my angel forever. I am lost for words. My prayers are with her family. Such a bright soul and the sweetest girl with a smile on her face."

The other victims identified so far come from a host of different countries and continents — a fact that speaks to the international flavor of the great city where they died. Among them was Nick Alexander, a British man from Colchester in Essex.

Alexander's family confirmed his death in a statement obtained by the Guardian. Alexander was working with Eagles of Death Metal, the California group playing at the Bataclan concert hall when it was attacked by suicide attackers carrying automatic rifles and wearing explosive vests.

Nohemi Gonzalez, 20, of El Monte, California, is the only U.S. citizen so far identified as among at least 129 people killed in the terror attacks in Paris, Friday. (Photo: Strate - Ecole de Design via Facebook)

"Nick was not just our brother, son and uncle, he was everyone's best friend — generous, funny and fiercely loyal," the statement said.

USA TODAY has compiled the list of others killed from multiple media outlets. They include:

Chile's Foreign Ministry reported three Chilean citizens were killed in the attacks. A ministry statement identified one of the dead as Luis Felipe Zschoche Valle, 33, who had lived in Paris for eight years with his French wife. The ministry said he was killed at the Bataclan concert hall.

The ministry said the other victims were Chilean exile Patricia San Martin Nunez, 62, and her daughter, Elsa Veronique Delplace San Martin, 35, who was born in France.

The women are described as the niece and grandniece of Chile's ambassador to Mexico, Ricardo Nunez. Nunez told Chilean media that his relatives also died at the Bataclan hall. He said two people with them at the concert escaped alive.

Mexico's government said two of its citizens died in the tragedy, both women. The Mexican Foreign Ministry has not said where the women were killed in Friday night's attacks. It also hasn't released the women's identities, but reported one had dual Mexican-U.S. citizenship and the other held a Mexican-Spanish citizenship.

The ministry previously reported that a Mexican man was wounded at one of the Paris restaurants that was attacked. It said that man was operated on Saturday morning "satisfactorily." It also reported he holds dual Mexican-Austrian citizenship.

CLOSE A Southern California college student killed in the Paris terror attacks was in a restaurant with another Long Beach State student when she was fatally shot and carried out on a stretcher. (Nov. 14) AP

A Parisian lawyer was also killed, according to the Paris Bar and the London School of Economics. The school said Valentin Ribet graduated in 2014. Ribet, who had degrees from the London School of Economics and the Sorbonne, specialized in white-collar crime, according to the New York Times.

Lola Salines, who worked with La Boucherie de Paris, a roller derby team, was killed, according to her father, Georges Salines. He wrote on Twitter that Salines was at the Bataclan theater, where the majority of victims died.

A music journalist and music industry member were also among the dead at the concert hall. Guillaume Decherf worked at French cultural magazine Les Inrockuptibles, which announced his death. On the magazine's Twitter page, it posted a link to a review he wrote last month of the band's latest album.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1NTtXvX