The 26-year-old daughter of a Moroccan immigrant had been under police surveillance because her name came up in a drug-trafficking case, said a police union official, speaking on condition of anonymity because he wasn’t authorized to talk to media.

Hasna Aitboulahcen lived a secular life, drinking alcohol and rarely visiting a mosque, but police say she died an extremist’s death: blowing herself up by detonating a suicide vest.

Three police officials said the woman killed during the raid was Abaaoud’s “cousin,” although the term can be used by young French of North African descent to refer to close friends who are no blood relation.

In a statement Thursday, the prosecutor’s office said that Abaaoud’s body was found in an apartment building targeted in the raid in Saint-Denis. It said he was identified based on skin samples.

PARIS—Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the possible ringleader of last week’s terrorist attacks, has been identified as among those killed in a police raid north of Paris Nov. 18, the Paris prosecutor said.

French Minister of Interior Bernard Cazeneuve said they did not know Abaaoud was in Europe until Nov. 16, after the Paris attacks were carried out.

The bodies recovered in Wednesday’s raid were badly mangled. Part of the woman’s spine landed on a police car, which complicated the task of identifying the bodies.

Aitboulahcen died Wednesday as police closed in on an apartment in suburban Saint-Denis, along with Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the man suspected of orchestrating the Nov. 13 attacks across Paris that killed 129 people. It was not known if she had any role in the attacks.

Because her name came up in a drug-trafficking case, Aitboulahcen was under surveillance, and her movements may have led authorities to the Saint-Denis flat.

Abaaoud, the son of a Moroccan-born shopkeeper in Brussels, played “an instrumental role in the attacks” in Paris, he said. “The Saint-Denis operation had a target and that target was attained.”

Authorities had tapped her phone at the time of the raid, according to two police officials, also speaking on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to talk to media. They did not say when the wiretap began.

Born in the Paris suburb of Clichy-la-Garenne, Aitboulahcen moved to the eastern French town of Creutzwald with her parents and four siblings when she was 16.

She had a sister and two brothers, Creutzwald Mayor Jean-Luc Wozniak, told The Associated Press. He added that the four siblings spent some time in foster care, and the family moved into an apartment located in a housing project in 2006.

Some years later Aitboulahcen left Creutzwald and settled in the Paris suburb of Clichy-sous-Bois, returning occasionally to visit her father, Wozniak said.

Her father, who was born in Marrakech, and her older sister moved to Morocco, the mayor added.

Two years ago, Aitboulahcen briefly managed a construction company based in the Paris suburb of Epinay-sur-Seine that went bankrupt less than 10 months later, according to an official registry of company filings.

Neighbours and relatives quoted by French media said she drank alcohol and rarely attended a mosque.

Meanwhile, the Paris prosecutor’s office said the eight people detained Wednesday in the raid will stay in custody for at least another day. Authorities said five men in the apartment building were taken into custody. A woman and two other men, including the man whose apartment was used as the cell’s hideout, were arrested on a nearby street.

Under French law, officials can detain suspects for up to 96 hours without charges.

Also on Thursday, police raided a house in the city of Charleville-Mezieres, about 145 kilometres east of Paris on Thursday, but police spokeswoman Mathilde Coulon would not give further details. French police are looking for anything that could be linked to jihadi networks or illegal weapons.

French authorities declared a state of emergency after the attacks, and security forces have conducted 414 raids, made 60 arrests and seized 75 weapons, including 11 military-style firearms, the Interior Ministry said.

The lower house of the French parliament has already voted to extend the state of emergency, which allows for police raids, searches and house arrest without permission from a judge, for three more months. The measure must now be approved Friday by the senate, France’s higher chamber.

The state of emergency expands police powers to carry out arrests and searches, and allows authorities to forbid the movement of persons and vehicles at specific times and places.

The Associated Press reported Thursday that a demonstration at France’s oldest mosque that aimed to show inter-community solidarity after last week’s Islamic State-claimed attacks in Paris has been cancelled due to security concerns.

A statement from the chief imam Dalil Boubakeur said the mosque in Paris had consulted with authorities and decided it was too dangerous to hold the Friday gathering at which hundreds were expected to attend, including Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo.

French Minister of Interior Bernard Cazeneuve “cooperation in the fight against terrorism is crucial” in the European Union, and he will meet with EU ministers on Friday in Brussels to discuss how to deal with terrorism across the territory.

“We have to move quickly and strongly. Europe must do it while thinking about the victims of terrorism and their loved ones.”

With France still on edge from last week’s deadly attacks, Prime Minister Manuel Valls warned Thursday that Islamic extremists might, at some point, use chemical or biological weapons, and urged lawmakers to extend the national state of emergency for the three months requested.

“Terrorism hit France not because of what it is doing in Iraq and Syria . . . but for what it is,” Valls told the lower house of Parliament. He added, “We know that there could also be a risk of chemical or biological weapons.”

Valls did not say there was a specific threat involving such weapons.

In neighbouring Belgium, where many of the Paris attackers lived, Prime Minister Charles Michel on Thursday announced a package of additional anti-terror measures, and said 400 million euros ($568 million) would be earmarked to expand the fight.

He told lawmakers that security personnel will be increased and special attention will be paid to eradicating messages of hate. He also called for more international co-operation, and said he wants to amend the Belgian constitution to extend the length of time terror suspects can be held by police without charge.

“All democratic forces have to work together to strengthen our security,” Michel said.

An official in the Belgian federal prosecutor’s office told The Associated Press the raids were taking place in the suburb of Molenbeek and other areas of Brussels. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the investigation is continuing, said the actions were focusing on Hadfi’s “entourage.”

French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius urged the international community to do more to eradicate the Islamic State group, which claimed responsibility for last Friday’s attacks on a rock concert, Parisian cafés and the national stadium.

Fabius, speaking on France-Inter radio, said the group “is a monster. But, if all the countries in the world aren’t capable of fighting against 30,000 people (IS members), it’s incomprehensible.”

France has stepped up its airstrikes against extremists in Syria since the attack, and French President François Hollande is going to Washington and Moscow next week to push for a stronger international coalition against IS.

Speaking after the seven-hour siege in Saint-Denis, Hollande said that France was “at war” with the Islamic State group.

In its English-language magazine, Islamic State said it will continue its violence and “retaliate with fire and bloodshed” for insults against the Prophet Muhammad and “the multitudes killed and injured in crusader airstrikes.”

Paris prosecutor Molins said Wednesday that investigators found a cellphone in a garbage can outside the Bataclan concert hall in eastern Paris where 89 of the victims of Friday’s carnage died. It contained a text message sent about 20 minutes after the massacre began. “We’re off, it’s started,” it read.

Molins said investigators were still trying to identify the recipient of the message.

French authorities have said most of the Friday attackers — five have been identified so far — were unknown to them. But two U.S. officials said that many, although not all, of those identified were on the U.S. no-fly list. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they weren’t authorized to discuss the issue publicly.

A Spanish security official said French authorities had sent a bulletin to police across Europe asking them to watch out for a Citroen Xsara car that could be carrying Salah Abdeslam, whose brother, Brahim, was among the attackers who blew themselves up.

— with files from thestar.com