Jean-Michel Fauvergue, chief of the elite police unit that carried out Wednesday’s raid on an apartment in a Paris suburb, gave a blow-by-blow account of the operation in an interview with Le Figaro newspaper.

The Washington Post, citing two senior European officials, reported that the raid resulted in the deaths of at least two suspected terrorists, including Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the alleged ringleader of Friday’s terrorists attacks in Paris. Three other suspects were arrested.

Fauvergue heads the police counterterrorism unit known as RAID, for Research, Assistance, Intervention, Deterrence.

“We knew that [Abaaoud] was perhaps there. Other services gave us that information,” Fauvergue told Le Figaro. He said the word was that two men and a woman were in the apartment and that they were armed with AK-47 assault rifles and explosive vests.

The raid started at 4:16 a.m. with an attempt to blast open the third-floor apartment door with explosives, but the reinforced door would not open properly, and the element of surprise was lost, he said. The terrorists inside then blocked the door with a heavy object.

Hundreds of shots were exchanged, and the terrorists also threw grenades, he said. The police then decided to send in a dog, Diesel, but it was killed with a shotgun.

According to the account, six sharpshooters were posted on surrounding buildings. One of them saw one of the terrorists and ordered him to raise his hands. He refused and opened fire with a Kalashnikov. The sharpshooter wounded him with a shot, but the terrorist continued firing.

Then the woman let loose a long volley of shots, followed by a big explosion. The windows were blown out, and part of a body fell on one of the police cars in the street. No police were injured by the blast.

About five hours into the siege, police could hear only one Kalashnikov firing. The second person shooting was dead. Police then decided to use 40mm flash-bang grenades designed to deafen and stun, throwing about 20 of them into the apartment.

Police also used a drone and two robots to try to do reconnaissance, without much success. There were holes in the floor, so the commandos passed cameras up through them from the second floor. One of the bodies fell through to the second floor. It was badly mutilated by explosions.

On the third floor landing, two men were found hiding under laundry and debris. They were arrested.

“Five of our men were wounded” by bullets or shrapnel, none seriously, Fauvergue said. About 70 police commandos participated in the raid, out of 110 police in all on the scene.