Police are investigating a link between a Paris bombers and a potential terror cell in the UK.

One of the ISIS attackers reportedly made a series of phone calls to Birmingham in the build up to the massacre which killed 130 people and injured 352 in the streets of the French capital.

And another jihadi is also said to have made trips to London and Kent, sparking fears that they communicating with a UK-based terror cell.

Police are investigating a link between one of the Paris bombers and a potential terror cell in the UK

One of the ISIS attackers reportedly made a series of phone calls to Birmingham in the build up to the massacre which killed 130 people in the streets of the French capital

A source told The Mirror: 'They were made shortly before the Paris attacks. British police are urgently investigating whether anyone in the UK was involved in those atrocities and also whether there is a linked terror cell based here.'

Britain has now joined France in airstrikes on the jihadists in Syria yesterday, following the terrorist attacks last month.

And now security chiefs are on high alert as Scotland Yard believes a Paris-style attack in the UK is 'highly likely' and the Metropolitan Police's Terrorism Command team are working with authorities in France.

A Scotland Yard spokesman said: 'The current threat to the UK from international terrorism remains severe meaning an attack is highly likely. That's the assessment which we have prepared for.

'People would have seen the large-scale training held in London for the type of scenario that tragically happened in Paris.'

Parisians look at the scene outside the Bataclan concert hall after an attack on November 13

Salah Abdeslam (pictured) and an accomplice are still on the run, while the other seven were killed

A number of jihadist suspects have been arrested in Birmingham and a man from the city was among 16 people arrested the day before the Paris killings after a request from Italian officials over allegations of an international plot to kill diplomats.

There have been 232 people held over the attacks on November 13, but there has been no confirmation or arrests made linked to the UK.

The nine terrorists who caused mass bloodshed and mayhem on the streets of Paris were mainly from Belgium.

Salah Abdeslam and an accomplice are still on the run, while the other seven were killed.

Last week it emerged that Turkish authorities warned France and Belgium a year ago about some of the jihadis involved in the Paris terror attacks.