Police in France have been given huge new powers including the ability to put people under house arrest without trial and to block websites.

France's parliament has extended the country's state of emergency for three months, allowing authorities to get access to huge powers that date back to 1955.

The state of emergency was declared on Saturday, just after attacks that left 129 people dead.

Such a decision gives the police powers including the ability to keep people in their homes without trial, searching the homes of people without a warrant from a judge, and the power to block any website that is deemed a problem.

Rights groups have worried that the decision could become permanent, allowing for the extension of authorities' powers into normal life. But the French government said that such powers were necessary.

"This is the fast response of a democracy faced with barbarism. This is the effective legal response in the face of an ideology of chaos," Prime Minister Emmanuel Valls told parliament.

Valls said the measures were "modern and effective tools to fight the terrorist threat".

In pictures: Paris attacks







25 show all In pictures: Paris attacks















































1/25 Paris attacks French police with protective shields walk in line near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

2/25 Paris attacks Rescuers evacuate an injured person on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire AFP

3/25 Paris attacks French Vigipirate troops mobilize next to Place de la Bastille AFP

4/25 Paris attacks French soldiers mobilize near to the Place de la Bastille AFP

5/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated outside the scene of a hostage situation at the Bataclan theatre EPA

6/25 Paris attacks People react as they gather to watch the scene near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

7/25 Paris attacks French police secure the area outside a cafe near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

8/25 Paris attacks Rescuers workers evacuate victims near the Bataclan concert hall AFP

9/25 Paris attacks French Prime Minister Manuel Valls and French President Francois Hollande attending an emergency meeting at the Interior Ministry AFP

10/25 Paris attacks Spectators invade the pitch of the Stade de France after explosions were heard outside AP

11/25 Paris attacks A man lies on the ground as French police check his identity near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

12/25 Paris attacks Police officers man a position close to the Bataclan theatre AFP

13/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France in Paris EPA

14/25 Paris attacks Two men evacuate the Place de la Republique square in Paris as a police officer looks on AFP

15/25 Paris attacks Football fans are evacuated from the Stade de France stadium

16/25 Paris attacks An armed police officer Dan Gabriel

17/25 Paris attacks The Stade de France is evacuated after reports of an explosion

18/25 Paris attacks A member of the French fire brigade aids an injured individual near the Bataclan concert hall

19/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France in Paris

20/25 Paris attacks Police are seen outside a cafe in 10th arrondissement of the French capital Paris,

21/25 Paris attacks Rescuers assist an injured man on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire, close to the Bataclan concert hall AFP

22/25 Paris attacks The scene at a restaurant in 10th arrondissement

23/25 Paris attacks The Bataclan theatre - where around 100 people are thought be held hostage

24/25 Paris attacks The Stade de France as it was evacuated

25/25 Paris attacks Forensic experts inspect the site of an attack outside the Stade de France stadium in Saint-Denis AFP

Under the state of emergency, police have the power to conduct searches without getting judicial warrants, though they cannot search the homes and offices of parliamentarians, journalists or lawyers.

The new measures mean anyone suspected of posing a threat to security can be placed under house arrest for 12 hours a day to restrict their movement. Even if the house arrest is lifted, suspects can be prevented from meeting others deemed a threat.

Electronic tagging can also be used to ensure suspects under house arrest who are particularly dangerous remain confined.

The authorities have the power to block Internet sites deemed to incite or advocate "acts of terrorism", public demonstrations are banned and groups inciting acts that could seriously affect public order can be dissolved.

Rights campaign group Amnesty International said the emergency measures must not become permanent fixtures.

Who was Abdelhamid Abaaoud, mastermind of the Paris attacks?

"Time and again we have seen emergency measures extended and codified until they become part and parcel of the ordinary law, chipping steadily away at human rights," said John Dalhuisen, Amnesty International's director for Europe and Central Asia.

"In the long run, the pernicious ideology underpinning the Paris attacks can only be defeated by upholding the foundational values of the French Republic," he said in a statement.

A gathering planned for Friday in front of the Central Mosque in Paris was cancelled after discussions with police.

Additional reporting by Reuters