Paris attacks: Malcolm Turnbull condemns 'brutal terrorist attacks', pledges solidarity with France

Updated

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has labelled a series of terrorist attacks in Paris an assault intended to suppress freedom worldwide.

More than 120 people were killed in a series of coordinated terror attacks in Paris. Another 350 were injured, including 19-year-old Hobart woman Emma Grace Parkinson.

About 100 of those injured were in critical conditions.

Speaking from Berlin, Mr Turnbull praised France's resilience and pledged solidarity with its people.

"The home of freedom has been assaulted by terrorists determined to attack and suppress freedom, not just in France, but throughout the world," he said.

"This is an attack, as president [Barack] Obama has said, on all humanity."

Mr Turnbull praised the French football fans who sang the national anthem as they left Stade de France, where several bombs were detonated.

"They sang their national anthem proudly and that is how all free people should respond to these assaults," he said.

"Freedom stands up for itself, stands up for its values in the face of terrorism.

"In France, and Australia, all around the world, we stand shoulder to shoulder with the people of France and with all free peoples in the battle against terrorism."

He said the terror alert level for Australia would not be raised from its current "high" rating in the wake of the attacks.

"Australians should be reassured, that we have the finest security agencies in the world," he said.

"We are working very closely with security agencies in other countries, of course, particularly now with the security agencies in France."

Attacks have hallmark of Islamic State: Bishop

Foreign Minister Julie Bishop confirmed one Australian was among the injured.

"I am aware of an Australian who has been injured in the Paris attacks and we are providing consular assistance," she said in a statement.

"The Australian Government is continuing to work with French authorities to identify any other Australians who may be affected."

Ms Bishop earlier labelled the attacks "a black Friday for France and for the world".

"We have offered all assistance to the French authorities and we stand in solidarity with the French people in condemning these horrific and devastating attacks," she said.

She said at least 2,500 Australians were registered as being in France.

"My advice to Australians is stay put, keep safe," Ms Bishop said.

The Foreign Minister also linked the attacks with Islamic State, but stressed no organisation had yet claimed responsibility.

"We don't know who has carried out these horrendous attacks on innocent people, but it certainly has all the hallmarks of the terrorist attacks we've seen in recent times by [Islamic State], Daesh and similar organisations," she said.

Other political leaders have also condemned the attacks, including Opposition Leader Bill Shorten.

"The world will not give in to fear," he wrote on Twitter.

Greens leader Richard Di Natale also expressed his sympathies.

"On behalf of the Australian Greens, our thoughts are with the people of Paris who have lost loved ones in this horrendous and senseless violence," Mr Di Natale said.

"Australia should do whatever it can to assist France in this time of tragedy and heartbreak."

Former prime ministers Tony Abbott and Kevin Rudd wrote on Twitter about the attacks.

Mr Abbott said the atrocity illustrated "the scale of the security challenge we all face", while Mr Rudd called the events "an attack on us all".

Mr Abbott told Macquarie Radio the attacks show the challenges of dealing with the Islamic State terrorist group.

"This is a grim day for the people of Paris and the people of France," he said.

"It's a grim reminder of the security challenges all of us face.

"I certainly want to reassure Australians that we have ever vigilant and highly professional police and emergency services."

Anyone with concerns for family or loved ones in Paris should contact the Department of Foreign Affairs consular emergency number on 1300 555 135 or +61 2 6261 3305 if overseas.

Topics: terrorism, death, federal-government, france, australia

First posted