• Two still on the loose: Abdeslam, and new suspect Mohamed Abrini • Mastermind Abaaoud planned to don suit to blend in and attack commercial centre • Eagles of Death Metal: ‘We can’t wait to return to the Bataclan’ • Brussels reopens after lockdown • US issues rare worldwide travel alert due to terror threats

Two brothers who took part in the Paris attacks that killed 130 and the suspected chief organiser were on a terror suspect watch list handed by Belgian intelligence to the mayor of Molenbeek a month ago, it emerged today, write Henry Samuel in Paris and Matthew Holehouse in Brussels.

Françoise Schepmans, mayor of Molenbeek, a Brussels district dubbed a “terrorists’ den” due its links with jihadists, has admitted receiving a list with the names and addresses of more than 80 people suspected as Islamic militants living in her area.

This included Abdelhamid Abaaoud, a Molenbeek resident who had left for Syria to fight for the Islamic State in early 2014 and was killed last week outside Paris, along with Brahim Abdeslam , who blew himself up on the boulevard Voltaire and his brother Salah Abdeslam - currently on the run.

Ms Schepmans told the New York Times: “What was I supposed to do about them? It is not my job to track possible terrorists.” That, she added, was “the responsibility of the federal police”.

Belgium has come under criticism in France over its perceived intelligence failings before and after the attacks, with Le Monde newspaper calling it a "clearing house for jihadism" that risks becoming a fractious "nation without a state".

The Belgian capital has been under the highest-level threat alert since Saturday, meaning that authorities fear a “serious and imminent attack”. Yet schools and subways began reopening across the city on Wednesday, despite the fact that Salah Abdeslam is still on the run, along with another suspect named as Mohamed Abrini, 30, seen driving a car with Abdeslam two days before the atrocities.

Mohamed Adbeslam, the brother of terrorists Salah and Brahim, on Wednesday confirmed having met Abrini but denied any knowledge of the terror plot, saying he thought his brothers were going “skiing”.

He even claimed to have received messages of support from the families of victims.

"Fortunately, there are many people who believe me and I get a lot of messages of support, from a lot of French in particular, families of victims," he said.

"I totally understand their anger against me and my family. But I also want to tell them that, while unfortunately we did nothing, we did not want what happened in Paris.

In neighbouring France, François Hollande urged fellow countrymen to deck their homes with the national flag during a day of mourning on Friday for victims of the Paris attacks.

The French president will lead a solemn ceremony along with victims’ families at the Invalides, which houses a military museum and Napoleon's tomb.

Manuel Valls, the prime minister, on Wednesday warned that France’s war on terror would last a long time amid a “permanent” threat of more attacks.

France has placed 124 people under investigation since a state of emergency was issued hours after the Paris attacks, and has conducted more than 1,230 searches, recovering 230 arms, according to Bernard Cazeneuve, the interior minister.

On Wednesday, a French court handed a six-month suspended jail sentence to a man suspected of mentoring at least two young jihadists. Olivier Corel, 69, nicknamed the White Emir is suspected of radicalising Mohammad Merah, who killed seven people in Toulouse in 2012, and Fabien Clain, whose voice was identified on an audio tape in which Isil claimed responsibility for the Paris attacks.

The sentence, however, was for illegal possession of a hunting rifle.

For all of yesterday's developments click here