In an address on Saturday, Nov. 14, French President Francois Hollande said the attacks in Paris that killed 127 people were "an act of war" organized from abroad by Islamic State with internal help. (Reuters)

Declaring a state of emergency and closing the nation's borders, French President François Hollande delivered this speech Friday in the midst of attacks that devastated Paris. Read the full coverage here.

"My dear compatriots,

As I speak, terrorist attacks of unprecedented proportions are underway in the Paris area. There are dozens killed, there are many injured. It is a horror.

We have, on my decision, mobilized all forces possible to neutralize the terrorists and make all concerned areas safe. I have also asked for military reinforcements. They are currently in the Paris area, to ensure that no new attack can take place. I have also called a cabinet meeting that will be held in a few minutes.

Two decisions will be taken: A state of emergency will be declared, which means that some places will be closed, traffic may be banned, and there will also be searches which may be decided throughout Ile de France (greater Paris). The state of emergency will be proclaimed throughout the territory (of France).

The second decision I have made is to close the borders. We must ensure that no one enters to commit any crimes and that those who have committed the crimes that we have unfortunately seen can also be arrested if they should leave the territory.

This is a terrible ordeal which once again assails us. We know where it comes from, who these criminals are, who these terrorists are.

In these difficult moments, we must — and I'm thinking of the many victims, their families and the injured — show compassion and solidarity. But we must also show unity and calm.

Faced with terror, France must be strong, it must be great and the state authorities must be firm. We will be.

We must also call on everyone to be responsible.

What the terrorists want is to scare us and fill us with dread. There is indeed reason to be afraid. There is dread, but in the face of this dread, there is a nation that knows how to defend itself, that knows how to mobilize its forces and, once again, will defeat the terrorists.

French citizens, we have not completed the operations. There are still some that are extremely difficult. It's at this moment that the security forces are staging an assault, especially in a place in Paris.

I ask you to keep all your trust in what we can do with the security forces to protect our nation from terrorist acts.

Long live the Republic and long live France."

Hollande then visited the Bataclan music hall, where armed assailants stormed the venue and more than 100 people died. His remarks:

“To all those who have seen these awful things, I want to say we are going to lead a war which will be pitiless. Because when terrorists are capable of committing such atrocities they must be certain that they are facing a determined France, a united France, a France that is together and does not let itself be moved, even if today we express infinite sorrow.”

After the Charlie Hebdo attacks in January, he delivered this statement:

"But even though she is aware that she has faced up to this situation and her security forces are composed of men and women who are capable of bravery and courage, France knows that there will be more threats targeted against her."

1 of 74 Full Screen Autoplay Close The attacks Skip Ad × The deadly Paris attacks in 2015 View Photos More than 120 died in a coordinated terrorist assault across the French capital on Nov. 13, 2015. Caption More than 120 died in a coordinated terrorist assault across the French capital on Nov. 13, 2015. An undated handout photograph made available by the Belgian Federal Police, April 8, shows Mohamed Abrini who was arrested by Belgian officials. Abrin is a key suspect from last year’s terrorist attacks in Paris. EPA Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

Read our full coverage:

At least 140 people slain in Paris terror attacks

Live blog: The Paris terror attacks