Irbil, Iraq (CNN) The French air force carried out bombing missions on ISIS targets in Raqqa, Syria, for a second day in a row. France is retaliating against Islamist extremist terror attacks that killed at least 129 people in Paris.

ISIS claims Raqqa as the capital of its so-called caliphate.

On Monday, France targeted a command center, a recruitment center, an ammunition storage base and a training camp in the city, the French military said.

On Sunday, the air force struck similar strategic targets in multiple sorties, reinserting France, a partner in the U.S.-led coalition striking ISIS from the air, into the battle against ISIS.

Many bombs, few killed?

JUST WATCHED Why did ISIS target France? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Why did ISIS target France? 01:59

A group of anti-ISIS activists in Raqqa reported 24 bombs dropped and 30 explosions overnight into Monday. Mostly the suburbs were hit, but in the city, the stadium and the museum were also struck, said Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently

ISIS uses the museum and the stadium as jails. Its headquarters are also in the stadium, the activists said.

On Sunday, 12 aircraft dropped 20 bombs on ISIS positions in Raqqa, destroying all targets, France's Defense Ministry said.

JUST WATCHED French reflect on loss, love, strength & tragedy Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH French reflect on loss, love, strength & tragedy 01:45

But French bombs may have killed few of the militants. The Islamist terror group has withdrawn from its sites in anticipation of the retaliation, Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently said. Streets have been empty, markets less crowded.

No civilian casualties have been reported, the activist group said, and the civilian population does not seem particularly worried.

The activists said there have been ISIS casualties but could not say how many.

An ISIS media wing has said there were no casualties Sunday.

'War' declared

Also on Monday, French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said that "war" had been declared on France and that "anybody who attacks the Republic, the Republic will fight back."

JUST WATCHED The moment the shots rang out at the concert hall Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH The moment the shots rang out at the concert hall 01:09

"It is not they who will destroy the Republic. The Republic will destroy them," he said.

France has been part of the U.S.-led coalition of nations fighting ISIS from the air, but after Friday's attacks that killed 129 people and wounded more than 350 others, France has flown more sorties.

ISIS has claimed responsibility for the attacks, which France's President described as "an act of war."

Military analyst: Strikes are 'symbolic'

A senior Obama administration official said that the United States was "working closely with the French to develop targets."

The U.S. military probably handed over a list of targets the coalition was planning to strike to the French to let them fly the sorties, said retired Lt. Gen. Mark Hertling, a military analyst. "These target packages were already in folders, as they're called, and I'm sure the central command handed them over to the French fighters to attack for the symbolism of France being back in the fight."

Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks President Barack Obama, French President Francois Hollande, second from right, and Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo arrive at the Bataclan, site of one of the Paris terrorists attacks, to pay their respects to the victims after Obama arrived in town for the COP21 climate change conference early on Monday, November 30, in Paris. Hide Caption 1 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks The Eiffel Tower in Paris is illuminated in the French national colors on Monday, November 16. Displays of support for the French people were evident at landmarks around the globe after the deadly terrorist attacks in Paris on Friday, November 13. Hide Caption 2 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People hold hands as they observe a minute of silence in Lyon, France, on November 16, three days after the Paris attacks. A minute of silence was observed throughout the country in memory of the victims of the country's deadliest violence since World War II. Hide Caption 3 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks French President Francois Hollande, center, flanked by French Prime Minister Manuel Valls, right, and French Education Minister Najat Vallaud-Belkacem, center left, stands among students during a minute of silence in the courtyard of the Sorbonne University in Paris on November 16. Hide Caption 4 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A large crowd gathers to lay flowers and candles in front of the Carillon restaurant in Paris on Sunday, November 15. Hide Caption 5 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A man sits next to candles lit as homage to the victims of the deadly attacks in Paris at a square in Rio de Janeiro on November 15. Hide Caption 6 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People light candles in tribute to the Paris victims on November 15 in Budapest, Hungary. Hide Caption 7 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People gather outside Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris on November 15 for a national service for the victims of the city's terror attacks. Hide Caption 8 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People write messages on the ground at Place de la Republique in Paris on November 15. Hide Caption 9 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People pray during a candlelight vigil for victims of the Paris attacks at a church in Islamabad, Pakistan, on November 15. Hide Caption 10 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks French golfer Gregory Bourdy passes a peace symbol for the Paris victims during the BMW Shanghai Masters tournament November 15 in Shanghai, China. Hide Caption 11 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A man offers a prayer in memory of victims of the Paris attacks at the French Embassy in Tokyo on November 15. Hide Caption 12 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A woman holds a candle atop a miniature replica of the Eiffel Tower during a candlelight vigil Saturday, November 14, in Vancouver, British Columbia. Hide Caption 13 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Front pages of Japanese newspapers in Tokyo show coverage and photos of the Paris attacks on November 14. Hide Caption 14 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks An electronic billboard on a canal in Milan, Italy reads, in French, "I'm Paris," on November 14. Hide Caption 15 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks The Eiffel Tower stands dark as a mourning gesture on November 14, in Paris. More than 125 people were killed in a series of coordinated attacks in Paris on Friday. People around the world reacted in horror to the deadly terrorist assaults. Hide Caption 16 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Lithuanians hold a candlelight vigil in front of the French Embassy in Vilnius, Lithuania, on November 14. Hide Caption 17 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Thousands gather in London's Trafalgar Square for a candlelit vigil on November 14 to honor the victims of the Paris attacks. Hide Caption 18 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A woman lights candles at a memorial near the Bataclan theater in Paris on November 14. Hide Caption 19 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A man places a candle in front of Le Carillon cafe in Paris on November 14. Hide Caption 20 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A woman holds a French flag during a gathering in Stockholm, Sweden, on November 14. Hide Caption 21 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Nancy Acevedo prays for France during the opening prayer for the Sunshine Summit being held at Rosen Shingle Creek in Orlando, Florida on November 14. Hide Caption 22 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks French soldiers of the United Nations' interim forces in Lebanon observe the national flag at half-staff at the contingent headquarters in the village of Deir Kifa on November 14. Hide Caption 23 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A couple surveys the signature sails of the Sydney Opera House lit in the colors of the French flag in Sydney on November 14. Hide Caption 24 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A woman places flowers in front of the French Consulate in St. Petersburg, Russia, on November 14. Hide Caption 25 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Candles are lit in Hong Kong on November 14 to remember the scores who died in France. Hide Caption 26 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A woman lights a candle outside the French Consulate in Barcelona, Spain, on November 14. Hide Caption 27 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Britain's Prince Charles expresses solidarity with France at a birthday barbecue in his honor near Perth, Australia, on November 14. Hide Caption 28 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks The French national flag flutters at half-staff on November 14 at its embassy in Beijing. Hide Caption 29 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte after a speech on November 14 in The Hague following the attacks. Hide Caption 30 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe becomes emotional after his speech on the French attacks during the opening ceremony of a Japanese garden in Istanbul, Turkey, on November 14. Hide Caption 31 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks A woman mourns outside Le Carillon bar in the 10th district of Paris on November 14. The attackers ruthlessly sought out soft targets where people were getting their weekends underway. Hide Caption 32 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People lay flowers outside the French Embassy in Moscow on November 14. Hide Caption 33 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Mourners gather outside Le Carillon bar in the 10th district of Paris on November 14. "We were listening to music when we heard what we thought were the sounds of firecrackers," a doctor from a nearby hospital who was drinking in the bar with colleagues told Le Monde. "A few moments later, it was a scene straight out of a war. Blood everywhere." Hide Caption 34 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People attend a vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau offered "all of Canada's support" to France on Friday, November 13, in the wake of the attacks. Hide Caption 35 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks Police show a heightened presence in Times Square in New York on November 13, following the terrorist attacks in Paris. Hide Caption 36 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People light candles at a vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on November 13. Hide Caption 37 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks University of Nevada, Las Vegas, fans observe a moment of silence for the victims of the terrorist attacks in Paris before a basketball game November 13. Hide Caption 38 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks The house lights are shut off and scoreboard dark as Boston Celtics players pause for a moment of silence for the Paris victims before an NBA basketball game against the Atlanta Hawks in Boston on November 13. Hide Caption 39 of 40 Photos: World reacts to Paris attacks People light candles at a vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on November 13. Hide Caption 40 of 40

The timing of the new airstrikes probably is no coincidence, analysts said.

"Clearly, it's a military activity, but it really sends a very strong political message, and it's all for internal consumption within France," said retired Maj. Gen. James "Spider" Marks, a CNN military analyst. "This is very visceral."

ISIS in Raqqa was also the target of retaliatory airstrikes in February.