Mohamed Abdeslam, the brother of two suspects accused of taking part in the Paris attacks, has insisted he is not "in the slightest way" connected to the killings and said he has no idea of the whereabouts of his brother Salah, who is currently the focus of an international manhunt.

Speaking to reporters in the Molenbeek area of Brussels, he said: "I was accused of committing an act of terrorism... but I have not in the slightest way been connected to the operation in Paris."

"I have worked for the local council for 10 years and I've never had a problem with anyone... my parents are completely shocked by the tragedy."

Salah Abdeslam, the 26-year-old who is wanted for his alleged part in Friday's killings

"My two brothers are normal and I have never noticed anything strange."

His brother Brahim died on Friday after blowing himself up outside a café in Paris' 11th arrodissement, wounding one person in the process.

His other brother, 26-year-old Salah, is currently 'France's most wanted man', and was found to be the renter of a Volkswagen Polo that was parked outside the Bataclan concert hall, where 89 people were killed.

The world mourns Paris attacks - in pictures







25 show all The world mourns Paris attacks - in pictures















































1/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Members of the public gather to lay flowers and light candles at La Belle Equipe restaraunt on Rue de Charonne in Paris Getty

2/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People lay a memorial to honour victims of the Paris terror attacks at Federation Square in Melbourne, Australia

3/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Soccer fans display the colors of the French flag in response to the deadly terrorist attack in Paris, France before the soccer match between the New York Cosmos' and the Ottawa Fury for the North American Soccer League championship at Hofstra University in Hempstead, New York, USA

4/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Pakistani Civil society activists shout slogans during a protest against Isis militants near the French consulate for the victims of the 13 November Paris attacks in Karachi, Pakistan

5/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People gather and view messages written on the ground at Place de la Republique in Paris

6/25 The world mourns Paris attacks French flags and a note reading "We will not let you spoil our children's lives" at the site of the attack at the Cafe Belle Equipe on rue de Charonne in the 11th district, in Paris

7/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A rose is placed beside a bullet hole at La Belle Equipe restaraunt on Rue de Charonne following the terrorist attack in Paris. As France observes three days of national mourning members of the public continue to pay tribute to the victims of deadly attacks

8/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People gather for a national service for the victims of the terror attack at Notre Dame cathedral in Paris

9/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Bono and band members of U2 pay their respects and place flowers on the pavement near the scene of yesterday's Bataclan Theatre terrorist attack in Paris

10/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A man kneels as he pays tribute to victims at Place de la Republique near the deadly attack sites in Paris

11/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Tributes to the victims at the Place de la Republique square in Paris AFP

12/25 The world mourns Paris attacks An electronic billboard on a canal show solidarity with Paris in Milan EPA

13/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People lay down flowers and light candles to tribute victims of Friday's attacks in Paris as the Brandenburg gate is illuminated in blue, white and red in the colors of the French flag, in Berlin Reuters

14/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A man leaves flowers as a tribute following the deadly attacks in Paris, outside the French consulate in Istanbul Reuters

15/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People take pictures of flowers placed in bullet holes in the window of a Japanese restaurant next to the cafe 'La Belle Equipe' AFP

16/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People gather at a makeshift memorial next to the Bataclan theatre in Paris on November 14, 2015,

17/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A woman carrying flowers cries in front of the Carillon cafe and the Petit Cambodge restaurant in Paris AP

18/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People gather in front of flowers that were laid outside the French embassy in Rome AP

19/25 The world mourns Paris attacks People react near the cafe 'La Belle Equipe' at the Rue de Charonne AFP

20/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A young girl places a candle in front of the Carillon cafe in Paris AP

21/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Flowers placed outside the cafe 'La Belle Equipe' at the Rue de Charonne in Paris, the scene for one of the attacks AFP

22/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A woman is comforted by others outside the Carillon cafe and the Petit Cambodge restaurant in Paris

23/25 The world mourns Paris attacks The Brandenbourg Gate featuring French national colors is pictured in Berlin, on November 14, 2015 a day after deadly attacks in Paris

24/25 The world mourns Paris attacks Flowers are laid in front of the French embassy in Rome EPA

25/25 The world mourns Paris attacks A candle is lit next to flowers outside the French Embassy in Berlin AFP

He was stopped by police in a car near the Belgian border on Saturday morning, but was later released after brief police checks. He has not been seen since.

Mohamed Abdeslam said he did not know where his brother was.

"My brother Salah still has not been heard from, perhaps he just isn't daring to show himself to the authorities," he said.

Video: Police arrest Paris suspect



"We don't know where he is or have any information."

Mohamed also claimed that he had no idea that Brahim was even in Paris when he blew himself up.

"My brothers are big boys, we don't ask them what they do with their time."

Mohamed added that his family was "extremely affected" by the events, and was "thinking about the victims."

He said: "You must understand that for my mother, [my brothers] are just her children."

Mohamed was taken into custody by Belgian police after the attacks, but was released after several hours of questioning.

129 people were killed in a number of attacks in Paris on Friday night, most of them in the Bataclan theatre, where they were attending an Eagles of Death Metal concert.

352 were wounded, and 99 are in a critical condition.

Police continue to hunt for Salah Abdeslam, and have branded him 'dangerous' and warned the public not to approach him.