A plot to carry out a series of five bombings was behind Germany’s dramatic decision to cancel a high-profile football match at the last minute earlier this week , according to new claims.

A newspaper claims to have seen a copy of a detailed dossier on the planned attacks in Hannover that was passed to the German authorities by French intelligence just two hours before kick-off.

It was the contents of this dossier that prompted the Germans to order the immediate evacuation of the stadium half an hour later, Hannoverische Allgemeine Zeitung claims.

The dossier gives details of a plan by a five-member terror cell led by a German citizen to target the football match in a series of coordinated bomb attacks.

There have been no arrests in connection with the threat to the match, suggesting members of the cell may still be at large.

One member is a woman, according to the newspaper report, while another is named as Faiz A.

The German authorities have so far refused to give any details of the intelligence behind the decision to call off Tuesday’s match against the Netherlands.

“Some of these answers would alarm the public,” Thomas de Maiziere, the interior minister, has said.

The game had been billed as a show of defiance against the Paris attacks, and Angela Merkel was due to attend together with several senior cabinet ministers.

Photo: AP

The terror cell was planning to set off three bombs inside the stadium during the game, according to Hannoverische Allgemeine Zeitung.

They would be smuggled into the stadium in vehicles authorised to enter, or by cell members with tickets.

Another bomb would be hidden at a bus stop, while a fifth would be placed at a train station by the female member of the cell some seven hours after the first blasts.

It was not a planned suicide attack: the woman was to leave on another train after placing the bomb.

Police say they found no explosives despite an all-night search of the stadium and city. But Bild newspaper has published allegations of a cover-up, claiming a paramedic witnessed explosives hidden in an ambulance at the stadium.

The unnamed paramedic says special forces were on the scene and he was "told not to talk about it", the newspaper claims.

The report also claims three police officers have been disciplined for leaking information about alleged bomb finds.

Meanwhile police said a suspicious package destroyed in a controlled explosion on Tuesday night was not a dummy bomb, as previously thought.

Passengers on an Intercity train in Hannover’s main station raised the alarm after witnessing a man appear to flee the train, leaving the package behind.

When police X-rayed the package and found wires and electrical components inside, bomb disposal experts were summoned.

Police previously said they believed the package was a well-made dummy bomb.

But its owner has now been traced and identified as an innocent electrical engineer. The package contained tools and equipment.

The engineer was not fleeing the train, but hurrying because he thought he was about to miss his connection, police said.