Seven assailants died in the Paris assault, six of them by detonating suicide vests and the other shot by police. Investigators have said that at least one and possibly two other attackers remain at large.



Abaaoud was one of six children of a Moroccan shopkeeper in the Brussels borough of Molenbeek St. Jean, which has a large Moroccan immigrant community. The sprawling district across an industrial canal from the capital's hip downtown has become notorious as an incubator of Islamist radicals who traveled to Syria and joined extremist groups.



He came from a working-class family but lived relatively well, at one point attending a prestigious private school, according to media accounts in Belgium. But Abaaoud turned to petty crime, spent time in jail in Belgium and fell under the influence of extremist Islam.



Abaaoud went to Syria and became an online recruiter of European militants before evolving into a clandestine operative, planning attacks in Europe. He also recruited a teenage brother to go to Syria. Their father, in Belgium, has publicly denounced Abaaoud's activities. On at least one occasion he was reported to have been killed in Syria, possibly as a ruse to keep him off law enforcement radar and help him enter Europe.



His image became infamous in Europe last year when a video surfaced online showing a laughing Abaaoud wearing a floppy hat and driving a pickup truck towing a group of tethered corpses through a field in northern Syria, apparently en route to a mass grave.



"Before, we towed jet skis, motorcycles, quad bikes, big trailers filled with gifts for vacation in Morocco," Abaaoud says, mugging for the camera as he pilots the Dodge pickup through a field. "Now, thank God, following God's path, we're towing apostates, infidels who are fighting us."



McDonnell reported from Paris and Zavis from Los Angeles. Times staff writer Brian Bennett in Washington and special correspondent Clara Wright in Paris contributed to this report.



Follow @mcdneville and @alexzavis on Twitter

