There were seven coordinated terror attacks in Paris carried out by militants, killing at least 130 people.

The first attacks were launched virtually simultaneously, with two explosions close to the Stade de France at just after 9.20pm local time, four miles apart.

The explosions came as a large crowd were enjoying the first half of the international friendly between France and Germany.

The attacks then moved to central Paris, where a separate team of gunmen arrived in a black Seat at the Right Bank area of the city.

The attackers opened fire on the Petit Cambodge Cambodian restaurant in Rue Bichat, and the Le Carillon bar on the other side of the road.

With devastating coolness they gunned down diners and revellers at the two venues, killing 15 as many enjoyed their Friday night out.

The fourth attack came on Rue de la Fontaine au Roi, when the same unit of terrorists drove the 500 yards to the Casa Nostra pizzeria and opened fire on diners, killing at least five.

Photo: AFP

From there, the militants drove around a mile south-east – apparently past the area of the Bataclan concert venue – to then launch another attack, this time on La Belle Equipe bar in Rue de Charonne. At least 19 people died after the terrace was sprayed with bullets at around 9.35pm.

The next attack, at the Bataclan concert venue in Boulevard Voltaire, was the most deadly. There, at least 89 people lost their lives when they were shot by black-clad gunmen wielding AK-47s and wearing suicide vests.

The attackers stormed into the hall and fired calmly and methodically at hundreds of screaming concert-goers, who were watching the US rock group Eagles of Death Metal playing to a full house of 1,500 people.

They began a siege that would last two hours and forty minutes. Two of the militants blew up their explosive belts as heavily armed anti-terror police ended the siege at around 12.30am. A third was shot by officers.

Terrifying details have emerged of the police assault on the Islamist attackers.

The first policeman to get there arrived at 10pm, about 20 minutes after the three gunmen burst into the concert hall last Friday night and began methodically killing fans who had turned out to watch the Eagles of Death Metal group.

At around 10.15 pm a heavily armed Swat team arrived and entered the building. The attackers had by then retreated to an upper floor. The police evacuated all the people they found and then, in two columns, went up the stairs to the right and the left of the auditorium.

As they progressed terrified people emerged from cupboards and other hiding places where they had taken cover.

“They came out like zombies. They were in a terrible state and could hardly walk,” said one officer involved in the raid, named only as Jean.

At 20 minutes past midnight the order was given to start the final assault. The police burst open the door and, protected by a heavy metal shield, being advancing down the corridor that was revealed to be full of about 20 hostages.

The attackers opened fire immediately but the police unit kept advancing, with officers rushing screaming hostages out as they went forward.

When finally they were face to face with the attackers, the police threw a stun grenade as they blasted their guns at the Islamists.

One attacker went down, and then the other detonated his suicide vest, blowing both their bodies to pieces. The assault had lasted three minutes.

Photo: Reuters

Finally, at around 9.50pm a third blast took place near the Stade de France, this time by a McDonald’s restaurant on the fringes of the stadium.

The boom caused terror among spectators who had already been attempting to flee the stadium following the first two explosions.

The match had continued, with many attributing the initial noises to fireworks, but word soon spread of what had taken place outside the stadium, as people read updates on their mobile phones.

Read a full reconstruction of what happened on the night of Friday, November 13 here.

Casualties

Photo: Getty Images

At least 130 people have died, according to city officials, with many still in intensive care.

One Briton - Nick Alexander - has been confirmed by family to have lost his life at the Bataclan.

At least 89 people were killed in the concert hall. Three assailants were also killed after police stormed in - two by activating their suicide vests and a third shot dead.

A little further east at least 19 people died when the terrace of the La Belle Equipe in Rue de Charonne was sprayed with gunfire, while 15 people were killed at Le Carillon bar-cafe in Rues Bichat.

Five people at the Casa Nostra pizzeria and a nearby bar were killed by attackers wielding rifles.

The Belgian connection

The Molenbeek area of Brussels has continued to see a major crackdown with raids continuing overnight and throughout the day yesterday.

On Sunday afternoon, French media reported that three brothers may be involved in the attacks and one may remain at large.

They are said to be:

Ibrahim Abdeslam - suicide bomber

Ibrahim Abdeslam was a suicide bomebr who blew himself up outside the Comptoir Voltaire restaurant in Paris. He rented the Seat Leon which was found abandoned in a Paris suburb with Kalashnikovs inside.

Salah Abdeslam - on the run

There is an international arrest warrant out for Salah Abdeslam - a French national who rented a black VW Polo in Belgium which was found abandoned near the Bataclan concert hall.

He was stopped near the Belgian border on Saturday morning in a grey VW golf also carrying two accomplices, but was not arrested at the time.

The third brother, Mohamed Abdeslam, was arrested on Saturday in Brussels but was released on Monday without charge.

He has since released a statement saying he had no idea that his brothers had been radicalised.

He said: "My parents are truly shocked. I am thinking of the victims. I did not know that they had been radicalised."

On Tuesday, he called for his brother- suspect Salah Abdeslam - to turn himself in.

French media reported on Tuesday Salah Abdeslam that he rented two rooms in Alfortville, near Paris.

According to news channel BFM TV, he used a credit card to rent the flat and police say there is evidence he was not alone.

It is reported at least two others stayed with him.

Le Point claims it has exclusive video inside the rooms which are sparse with pizza boxes and syringes lying around.

There are unconfirmed reports that Abdeslam is also on the run from Isil, fearing that the jihadists will wreak retribution on him for not completing his tasks.

Read more about the various connections to Belgium here.

Who were the other terrorists?

Omar Ismail Mostefai, 29, was identified by his finger, which was found among the rubble of the Bataclan concert hall. Police say he was one of three men who blew himself up killing 89 people in the bloodiest scene of the carnage. His father and brother, who handed himself in, are in custody and police are searching the family's home and the homes of his friends.

His brother told AFP that he had not seen Mostefai for years and said the attacks were "madness".

Photo: BFMTV

Born on November 21 1985, in the poor Paris suburb of Courcouronnes, Mostefai's criminal record shows eight convictions for petty crimes between 2004 and 2010, but no jail time.

Paris prosecutor Francois Molins said Mostefai had been singled out as a high-priority target for radicalisation in 2010 but, before Friday, he had "never been implicated in an investigation or a terrorist association".

Investigators are now probing whether he took a trip to Syria last year, according to police sources.

Bilal Hadfi blew himself up outside gate H of the Stade de France. He is said to have fought with Isil in Syria, and came from Belgium.

A teacher at a school he attended told the Telegraph Hadfi, 20, was an unambitious loner who wanted to be a lorry driver after failing his exams.

Ahmad Al Mohammad died in a suicide bomb at the Stade de France. A Syrian passport bearing his name was found at the scene.

The 25-year-old was born in Idlib, a city in north-west Syria, and the Paris prosecutor's office said fingerprints from the attacker match those of a person who travelled through Greece last month.

Sami Amimour was one of the suicide bombers who blew himself up at the Bataclan music hall, the Paris prosecutor's office said. A 28-year-old Frenchman, he was known to French intelligence services.

He was charged with terror offences in 2012 and was placed under judicial supervision. But he later disappeared and an international arrest warrant was issued for him.

Three of his relatives were arrested early today, prosecutors said.

Belgian Abdelhamid Abaaoud was named by a French official as the suspected mastermind of the Paris attacks. The official said he has been linked to thwarted attacks on a Paris-bound high-speed train and a church in the Paris area.

Raid targeting Abdelhamid Abaaoud

Two terror suspects have been killed and seven arrested in a raid by elite French SWAT forces at Saint Denis, a north-eastern Paris suburb targeting Abaaoud.

An unidentified person blew themself up seconds after police opened fire at around 4.20am local time in du Courbillon in the multi-ethnic working class district that is a stone’s throw from the Stade de France – where three suicide bombers blew themselves up on Friday outside a France-Germany friendly football game attended by president Francois Hollande.

A police sniper shot dead a second suspect later on. A third person, Hasna Aitboulahcen, cousin of Abaaoud, died.

Police arrested three men they found in the apartment but there has no been no confirmation as to who they were. At least one, perhaps two suspects are reportedly still holed up in the apartment.

Police came under heavy Kalashnikov fire when they initially tried to enter the flat. Three officers suffered light injuries in the operation that was still ongoing at 9.30 am local time, six hours after it began.

Police also arrested a man and woman near the location of the raid.

Terrorists plotted second attack at La Defense and Charles de Gaulle airport

The terror suspects killed and arrested on Wednesday were in the final stages of carrying out an "imminent" attack at Roissy Charles de Gaulle airport, which is near Saint-Denis, and a shopping centre in La Défense, the capital's business district, according to France 2, the main state broadcaster.

Citing police sources, France 2 said investigators believe the Saint-Denis suspects formed part of a "fourth team" on top of the three that took part in Friday's attacks in Paris and the Stade de France, which killed 130.

As well as the airport, the terrorist suspects had intended to strike the Quatre Temps shopping centre in La Défense, to the West of the capital.

On Wednesday morning, police searched two locations at Roissy, including the cargo branch of Air France. However the Paris airport security authority said these had "no direct link to the terror attacks but had other aims, notably the search for elements linked to the phenomenon of radicalisation", without providing more details.

Earlier, bomb threats forced two Air France flights bound from America for Paris to be diverted on Tuesday night.

An Air France jet from Los Angeles International Airport landed in Salt Lake City, while another from Washington Dulles International Airport landed in Halifax, Nova Scotia.

The aircraft were searched after they landed and no explosives were found on either plane, police and airport officials said.

The flights were "subjects of anonymous threats received by phone after takeoff," Air France spokesperson Christophe Paumier said.

Were there 20 attackers?

With seven suicide bombers dead, seven others under arrest and at least one man on the run, 15 men have so far been linked to the Paris attacks.

But CCTV footage suggests that there may have been a ninth attacker, who is still at large.

And Belgian intelligence officials have suggested that up to 20 people may have been part of the terrorist cell that planned the attacks.

Read a full account of what we know about the attackers so far here.

One attacker found with Syrian passport

A passport found near one of the suicide bombers at the Stade de France bore the name of Ahmad al-Mohammad.

It was used to register a refugee on the Greek island of Leros on October 3, and was then traced to Macedonia and an asylum claim in Serbia.

American intelligence officials have reported that the passport was clearly fake, based on the sequence of its serial number, something not apparently picked up on as its holder made his way through Europe.

Read more on this here.

Photo: Sky News

Arrests in France

It is now known that France conducted French police staged 128 raids, 23 arrests and seized 31 weapons in overnight raids on Monday in the wake of the Paris attacks.

Bernard Cazeneuve, the interior minister, announced that police carried out 168 raids and have assigned 104 people to house arrest.

Cazeneuve said: "It's just a start, these operations are going to continue, the response of the Republic will be huge, will be total. The one who targets the Republic, the Republic will catch him, will be implacable."

The investigation into the attack spread to Belgium on Saturday where police arrested several suspects in Brussels.

Belgian police also carried out several raids in Brussels on Monday morning.

Arrests in Germany

Three people have been arrested in Germany in connection with the attacks.

Spiegel magazine has named the man arrested in Germany in connection with the Paris attacks as Kamal A, 29, and his two female companions as Lava M, 28, and Didem A, 32.

They were arrested after an employee at a local supermarket saw the group and believed she recognised the man as Salah Abdeslam, the suspected Paris attacker who is on the run, the magazine reported on its website.

It is not currently clear whether the arrested man is Abdeslam using an alias or the arrests are a case of mistaken identity.

On Tuesday afternoon, police were still questioning the three suspects.

Who has been charged?

Three people have so far been charged in connection with the Paris attacks: two people, Hamza Attou and Mohammed Amri, have been charged for allegedly helping the on-the-run suspect Salah Abdeslam get from Paris to Brussels.

Another man, of Moroccan descent, has been charged for terrorist offences in relation to the attacks. A. Lazez, a 39-year-old from Brussels was on Friday charged with helping organise the Paris attacks, being part of a terrorist organisation, and illegally carrying a weapon.

Turkey has detained a Belgian citizen of Moroccan origin on suspicion of links to the Paris attacks. Ahmet Dahmani, 26, is accused of conducting reconnaissance work to choose the sites for the attacks in Paris, and was caught trying to head into Syria. He has not been charged.

France fights back

On Sunday, France struck back at the heart of Islamic State, launching 20 airstrikes on the Syrian town of Raqqa, the defacto capital of the "caliphate".

In a joint operation with US forces, targets including a command post, a recruitment centre for jihadists, an arms depot and a terrorist training camp were destroyed, according to the French defence ministry.

Overnight on Sunday, anti-terrorism units also launched raids across France, in Toulouse, Grenoble, Calais and Paris. Several arrests were made and weapons have been seized.

On Monday night, French warplanes carried out fresh raids overnight against the Islamic State stronghold of Raqqa in northern Syria, destroying a command centre and training centre, the defence ministry said.

Ten Rafale and Mirage 2000 fighters carried out the raid at 0030 GMT, dropping 16 bombs.

Turkey notified France of suspect almost a year ago

Reuters is reporting that a senior Turkish official twice notified France about a suspect in December 2014 and June 2015.

The official also said that they received a request from France on Omar Ismail Mostefai after the attacks.

"We did, however, not hear back from France on the matter," added the official.

The Turkish official confirmed that Mostefai entered Turkey from the northwestern province of Edirne that borders EU members Greece and Bulgaria in 2013.

"There is no record of him leaving the country," said the Turkish official.

The official said that French authorities had only showed interest in Mostefai after the attacks.

"It was only after the Paris attacks that the Turkish authorities received an information request about Omar Ismail Mostefai from France."

He said that on October 10, 2014, Turkey received an information request regarding four terror suspects from the French authorities, but not for Mostefai even though he had been identified by Turkey as a potential terror suspect.

France in mourning

French people gathered together on Sunday night in Paris to mourn the 130 people who lost their lives in the attacks.

A service was held at Notre Dame Cathedral and hundreds of people congregated at the Place de la Republique.

France held a two-minute silence at midday on Monday (11am GMT).

Photo: AP

Our correspondent Tom Rowley wrote from Paris:

A beautiful, life-affirming scene in the Place de la Sorbonne just now.

Inside, President Hollande marked a minute's silence for Friday's victims, but outside more than a thousand students entirely packed the square, which fell utterly still at midday.

A minute later, the applause rang out. One woman, who was sobbing, still put her hands together, determined to make some noise, to do something amid such helplessness.

Then, someone near the front of the crowd started singing La Marseillaise.

Soon, everyone joined in; some even shouted the words. All knew it by heart, but never before had it felt so potent.

When the singing ceased, there were two more - even louder - rounds of applause.

The students here were the same age as many killed on Friday - but they will not be silenced.

Hollande: France is at war

Francois Hollande gave an historic speech at Versailles on Monday before the upper and lower houses of parliament - only the third time this has happened since 1848.

He said: "France is at war. The acts committed on Friday night in Paris and at the Stade are acts of war, leaving at least 130 dead and many wounded; this constitutes an attack against our country, against its values against its youth, against its way of life." Isil struck France because it is 'free' and 'the nation of human rights'.

"This is not a war of civilisation as these aassisins don't have any. This is a war against the jihadist menace that threatens not just France."

Mr Hollande called on the rest of Europe to control its borders and confirmed his intention to prolong France's state of emergency for three months.

On Wednesday, two Air France flights from the US to Paris were diverted after a security alert. They were en-route to Paris Charles de Gaulle from Washington and Los Angeles respectively.

A statement from Air France said: "As a precautionary measure and to conduct all necessary security checks, Air France, applying their safety regulations in force, decided to request the landings of both aircraft."

EU troops could be sent to France

The EU has opened the door to Britain sending troops or other specialists to France after an emergency mechanism was triggered for the first time in the bloc's history.

France activated Article 42, a distress call that compels other EU states to send military and other support. It is akin to Article 5, the Nato mutual defence pact.

States have already pledged support, which could be military or civil. France will specify the support it needs to each state in the coming days.

Friday 13th Paris attacks Times quoted refer to GMT Spectators gather on the pitch of the Stade de France stadium. Photo: AFP the first explosion went off near the Stade de France, where president Francois Hollande was at a football match between France and Germany. One person was killed in the blast. The body of a terrorist was found at the scene wearing a suicide belt filled with shrapnel. Service personnel working outside the restaurant. Photo: Reuters Shortly after the first explosion at the Stade de France, gunmen with Kalashnikovs launched an attack at Le Carillon bar and Le Petit Cambodge restaurant on Rue Bichat, in the city's 10th arrondissement, killing 15 people and injuring 10. The attackers drove about 500 yards to the Casa Nostra pizzeria in Rue de la Fontaine au Roi and opened fire on diners on the terrace of the restaurant, killing at least five people and injuring eight. Another explosion went off outside the Stade de France when a second suicide bomber blew himself up. Forensic police search for evidences outside the La Belle Equipe cafe. Photo: Getty Images Militants launch an attack on La Belle Equipe in Rue de Charonne, spraying the terrace bar with bullets and killing 19 people in gunfire which witnesses say lasted "two, three minutes". Wounded people are evacuated outside the Bataclan theatre. Photo: EPA Three black-clad gunmen wielding AK-47s and wearing suicide vests stormed Le Bataclan during a concert by American rock band Eagles Of Death Metal. At least 89 were killed and more than 100 others injured during the shooting. The attackers were heard mentioning Syria and Iraq during the massacre. A third suicide bomber blew himself up on Rue de la Coquerie, near the Stade de France. A woman is evacuated outside the Bataclan. Photo: AP The first reports came in of the Bataclan massacre and within 10 minutes there was confirmation that a hostage crisis had developed at the theatre. Prime Minister David Cameron said on Twitter: “I am shocked by events in Paris tonight. Our thoughts and prayers are with the French people. We will do whatever we can to help.” An emotional French president Francois Hollande, who was earlier evacuated from the Stade de France, closed the borders and declared a state of national emergency. The French military were called into the centre of Paris. Opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn said on Twitter: “My thoughts are with the people of Paris tonight. We stand in solidarity with the French. Such acts are heinous and immoral.” Police officers gather outside the Bataclan concert venue in Paris. Photo: EPA French emergency services activate Plan Rouge to tackle the large numbers of casualties. Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France. Photo: EPA Parisians used the #PorteOuverte hashtag to search for or offer safe places for those fleeing the violence. The hashtag was soon trending. A new toll of at least 35 dead. President Obama delivered a speech at the White House, expressing solidarity with the people of Paris and calling the attacks terrorist acts. "Those who think that they can terrorise the people of France or the values that they stand for are wrong."We are reminded in this time of tragedy that the bonds of liberte, egalite, fraternite, are not just the values French people share, but we share."Those go far beyond any act of terrorism or the hateful vision of those who perpetrated the crimes this evening." Reports emerge of French taxi drivers turning off their meters and offering passengers free rides home. A citywide curfew was put in place, the first since 1944. People receive medical attention after being evacuated from the Bataclan theatre. Photo: AP Police storm the Bataclan, ending the siege. Two terrorists die after activating their suicide vests and a third is shot dead by officers. The death toll reached at least 120. Saturday, November 14 French soldiers patrol the area at the foot of the Eiffel Tower. Photo: AFP At least 1,500 soldiers have been called upon to patrol the streets of Paris. Schools, markets, museums and major tourist sites in the Paris area are closed and sporting fixtures cancelled. Hollande calls the attacks "an act of war... committed by a terrorist army, the Islamic State, against France, against... what we are, a free country". He declares three days of national mourning. Isil claimed responsibility, saying in a statement issued in Arabic and French that the attackers had targeted "the capital of abominations and perversions and those who carry the crusader banner in Europe". Passengers stand outside Gatwick airport after it was evacuated. Photo: @TimUnwin Gatwick Airport north terminal was evacuated after a suspected firearm was discovered. A 41-year-old French national was taken into custody for questioning. He was later charged with possession of an air rifle and a knife. David Cameron warned the UK "must be prepared for a number of British casualties", and condemned the "brutal and callous murderers. The Queen also sent a message of condolence to Mr Hollande, saying she and the Duke of Edinburgh had been "deeply shocked and saddened by the terrible loss of life in Paris". A victim is wheeled out of the Bataclan concert hall. Photo: REUTERS/Charles Platiau By noon on Saturday French officials had put the provisional death toll at 127 people from the combined attacks, with 180 injured and 99 people in hospital in critical condition. One of the bombers was identified by his fingerprints as a young Frenchman flagged for links with Islamic extremism. He is later named as Ismaël Omar Mostefaï, 29. Belgian policemen search for suspects in Molenbeek area (Brussels). Photo: Isopix/REX Shutterstock A number of people are arrested in Brussels in relation to the Paris attack. Belgian prosecutors later confirmed they have opened an anti-terrorist investigation based on a car that was hired in Belgium and was found near the Bataclan concert hall. Nick Alexander from Colchester was working at Bataclan. One Briton is confirmed to have died and "a handful" of others are feared to have been killed. The British victim was later named as Nick Alexander, who was selling band merchandise at the Bataclan. People gather to lay floral tributes and candles outside La Belle Equipe restaurant. Photo: Reuters Francois Molins, the Paris prosecutor, said 129 people were confirmed dead and 352 people were injured, with 99 in a critical condition. Sunday, November 15 Theresa May Home Secretary Theresa May indicated the British death toll in the Paris attacks may rise as she said the government has concerns about a "handful" of UK citizens. She said that British police and intelligence agencies were "working day and night to keep people secure".

An alleged bomb-maker found

Mohamed Khoualed handed himself in to police on Wednesday, three days after police raided his flat in this town on the Belgian border.

Police found explosives and detonators in the studio behind a drab redbrick house in a suburb of Roubaix, one of France's poorest towns and the one with the country's highest percentage of Muslims.

It is not known whether he is linked to the Paris attacks directly but judicial sources in Belgium said they believe Khoualed had been in contact with Salah Abdeslam, the Belgian fugitive suspected of a leading role in the attacks.

None of the neighbours shown his photo by the Telegraph recognised him.

There were always "dodgy-looking" people coming and going from the house that is split into several flats, said one neighbour, who declined to give her name.

"I thought it was more likely to be drug dealing than Islamists," said another, also asking for her name not be published.

Germany could see armed troops on its streets

The government in Berlin is considering deploying troops on the streets of Germany for the first time since the war because of the terrorist threat.

The move would be controversial in a country which has consciously shunned militarism in an effort to put distance between modern Germany and its Nazi past.

Tension has been raised in the country and on Tuesday night a friendly football Germany and Holland match was cancelled minutes before kick off amid fears that terrorists were planning an outrage at or near the stadium in Hanover.

A five-member cell led by a German citizen was planning a total of five bomb attacks in the city, Hannoverische Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper reported citing unnamed French security sources.

German authorities called off the match after reciving a tip-off from French intelligence just two hours before the match, the newspaper claimed. Three of the bombs were to be detonated at the stadium, and the other two at a bus stop and at a train station.

The bombs were to be smuggled into the stadium in a vehicle authorised to enter or by a cell member with a ticket.

Isil "threatens White House"

Having already threatened New York City, Isil is reported to have published another video, this time naming the White House as a target.

However, even though security was stepped up in New York earlier this week, James Comey, the FBI director has voiced scepticism over the authenticity of the latest threats.

Hostages taken in Mali hotel

A group of 10 jihadis throwing grenades attacks the Radisson Blu hotel in the Malian capital city of Bamako and takes 170 hostages. 80 people are 'freed' but three are dead.

Those able to recite verses of the Q'uran are released.

There are 1,000 French troops in Mali, as well as many UN troops.

The Radisson Blu lies just west of the city centre near government ministries and diplomatic offices in the former French colony.

The Chinese state news agency Xinhua said several Chinese tourists were among those trapped inside the building.

In March masked gunmen shot up a Bamako restaurant popular with foreigners, killing five people.

The Irish prime minister has promised to send troops to replace French soldiers in Mali, to relieve them so they can fight Isil.

Belgium declares state of emergency

The Belgian government has declared a state of emergency, warning of an "imminent" terror threat in Brussels. It has urged people to stay away from venues such as transport hubs and concert halls. One analyst said that the natuion's capital has effectively been shut down.