Bomb threat leads to cancellation of Germany-Netherlands 'freedom' football friendly

Updated

EA friendly football match between host Germany and The Netherlands in Hannover was called off less than two hours before its start over fears of a bomb attack, German police said.

Key points: Thousands of fans were evacuated

Police had indications of a planned attack with explosives

The crowd did not panic, ministers in attendance were "re-routed to a safe area"

Speculation explosives were found in a car was not confirmed

Hannover police president Volker Kluwe told a state broadcaster that authorities had taken seriously indications of a planned attack with explosives. He did not elaborate.

The match, which had been hailed as a "symbol of freedom" after the Paris attacks, was called off and thousands of fans were evacuated, without signs of panic, from the 49,000-capacity arena.

"The visitors who were already in the stadium at that time were asked to leave the stadium without panicking," police said in a brief statement.

After Friday's attacks in Paris, security measures in Hannover had been tight.

German chancellor Angela Merkel was set to attend with vice-chancellor Sigmar Gabriel and government ministers, in a show of solidarity with France.

"We were re-routed on our way to the stadium and are now in a safe area," German team spokesman Jens Grittner said on Twitter.

"We cannot say more at this moment."

Two Dutch government ministers attending the match — defence minister Jeanine Hennes and health and sport minister Edith Schippers — were returning home.

Speculation was rife that explosives had been found packed in a vehicle outside the ground and also at the local train station, but the interior minister said there was no sign of any explosives and no arrests had been made.

"There have been no arrests so far. As for the question whether explosives were found, I can tell you that as for now, no," Boris Pistorius said during a news conference in the west German city.

The world champions had not initially wanted the game to go ahead after having played against France in Paris on Friday as a wave of attacks hit the city, killing 129 people.

The contingent of 80 Germans, including players, coaches and staff, then spent the night holed up in the changing rooms of the Stade de France as the attacks took place across the capital, before heading for the airport on Saturday morning.

But the players, coaches and the national football association then decided to go ahead with the game to show unity.

Head coach Joachim Loew had called this morning's planned match "a clear message and symbol of freedom and a demonstration of compassion, as well as sorrow, for our French friends — not only in France, but throughout the world".

Before the match, players were practising the French anthem "La Marseillaise", which they had been set to sing in a sign of solidarity with the shaken nation.

The victims of the Paris attacks were set to be honoured by candlelight in what has been described as "a friendly in the true sense of the word".

"We want to take this opportunity to use light as a sign of sympathy to the world," the chairman of the Friends of Hanover, Roger Cericius, had told the Hannoversche Allgemeine newspaper.

French anthem reverberates around Wembley

Meanwhile, a moving rendition of the French national anthem reverberated around London's Wembley Stadium as fans of England and France paid tribute to the victims of the Paris attacks at their football friendly.

Sorry, this video has expired Video: Soccer fans salute France at Wembley Stadium (ABC News)

In a crowd of about 80,000 that included British prime minister David Cameron and Prince William, many stood to sing La Marseillaise, four days on from the attacks.

England won the game 2-0 but the result mattered little.

The words to the anthem were displayed on the stadium's big screen as the music was played by an on-pitch band, while England fans in the east stand held aloft blue, white and red cards that created a vast mosaic of the French Tricolore.

France midfielder Lassana Diarra, who lost a cousin in the attacks, was present on the pitch as the anthems played, along with his team-mate Antoine Griezmann, whose sister escaped the massacre at the Bataclan concert hall that left 89 people dead.

There was a heavy police presence outside the ground as fans arrived beforehand, while two armed counter-terror police officers were seen patrolling beside the pitch inside the stadium.

But supporters arriving at Wembley were relaxed, with one Malaysian fan telling AFP: "I have no fears at all. I believe that the British will provide the security necessary."

Breaking with convention, La Marseillaise was played after God Save the Queen in order to create a stand-alone moment of solidarity.

Many England fans had brought French flags to the stadium.

One banner in the crowd, picking up a social media hashtag, read: "Pray for Paris."

Prior to the anthems, and a solemnly observed minute's silence, figures including Prince William, France coach Didier Deschamps, England manager Roy Hodgson, French Football Federation president Noel Le Graet and his English counterpart Greg Dyke laid floral tributes beside the pitch.

In Istanbul before the friendly between Turkey and Greece, some Turkish fans shouted "God is great" and booed the opposing Greek team during a minute's silence for the victims of Paris attacks ahead of the match.

Watched by Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and his Greek counterpart Alexis Tsipras, a number of fans broke the minute's silence.

The fans chanted "Allahu Akbar" (God is great), booed the Greek team and also shouted slogans in favour of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Istanbul's Basaksehir stadium.

Turkish football fans regularly shout nationalist slogans at matches and it was not immediately clear if the behaviour was more aimed against historic rivals Greece than condoning the Paris attacks in any way.

Reuters/AFP

Topics: sport, soccer, terrorism, germany, netherlands

First posted