Friday's Paris attack and the 2008 terror strikes in Mumbai have similarities. Security agencies classify both as "urban terrorism", the intention being to create mass casualities.Security officials say it was certain that attacks at the Paris soccer stadium and concert hall would cause maximum deaths, a key ingredient of urban terrorism, which was carried out with precision in Mumbai.The Mumbai attackers had the same agenda, reason they struck at the CST railway station. The idea was to create maximum impact. "Other commonalities like six locations, suicide bombers and the hostage drama, choosing the evening for the attack could be coincidences," an official said.Former special secretary, cabinet secretariat, V Balachandran said that a concert would most certainly be held in the evening and the perpetrators were aware that any attack on this gathering would cause a widespread damage.Balachandran, who was part of the committee that probed the 26/11 attacks, pointed out a stark difference — unlike the Paris attack, terrorists who landed in Mumbai had been told to fi ght till the end. "In Paris, they were dying fast," he said. A restaurant, Le Petit Cambodge, figured on the target list at Paris like Leopold in Mumbai where terrorists went on a killing spree, which offi cials term a critical component of urban terrorism.Mumbai Police joint commissioner, law and order, Deven Bharti who participated in an operation during the 26/11 attacks, feels the similarities aren't a sheer coincidence. "The Paris attacks seem to be a replica of the Mumbai attacks or you can say the Mumbai operation was the blueprint," he said.Param Bir Singh, former state ATS DIG, now the Thane police commissioner, said that since 26/11, attackers have been looking for soft targets at public places and hotels to inflict large casualties. "There are lots of similarities. See the timing, terrorists coming in a group, the soft targets. The only different thing: In Mumbai, the terrorists carried hand grenades and were killed by the police. In Paris, the terrorists, after staging the attacks blew themselves up," said Singh.