Police in Brussels have shot dead a suspect in an anti-terror operation linked to the Paris attacks, after gunmen with assault rifles opened fire and wounded four officers.

The dead person has not been identified but prosecutors said it was not Salah Abdeslam, a key suspect in the November Paris massacre which killed 130 people, and who fled to Brussels after the attacks.

Dozens of security forces in balaclavas armed with submachine guns cordoned off the scene in the Forest neighbourhood, in the south of the Belgian capital, after armed police came under fire during a raid on a house.

"Police were fired at," Eric Van Der Sypt, a spokesman for the Belgian federal prosecutor, told AFP news agency, adding that the search was "linked to the Paris attacks investigation".

"A body was found during a search of a house ... his identity has not been established yet but whatever the case, it is not Salah Abdeslam," Van Der Sypt was later quoted as saying by the Belga news agency.

Brussels officials confirmed a major operation was underway involving police investigating the 13 November shootings when at least one gunman opened fire, though local media reported the manhunt that followed as involving two suspects.

Speaking to reporters in the Ivory Coast, interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve confirmed French special operatives were directly involved in the initial raid when gunfire broke out.

He said the operation involved intelligence linked to the Paris attacks last year, rather than any new terror threat.

Police at the scene where shots were fired during a police search of a house in the suburb of Forest near Brussels, Belgium

Police in Belgium confirmed one or more gunmen were on the run, and officers blocked off roads in the Belgian capital's southern suburb of Forest.

The mayor of the Brussels borough of Forest where the raid took place told Le Soir newspaper that one or more people had barricaded themselves into an apartment and that it was unclear how many others may be on the run.

Eight of the 11 named men charged over the Paris attacks remain in custody, while two others - including prime surviving suspect Saleh Abdeslam - are Belgian nationals.

A police source has reportedly told the AFP news agency that Abdeslam was not the specific target for the raid.

A victim is removed from the scene where shots were fired during a police search of a house in the suburb of Forest near Brussels, Belgium

Police at the scene where shots were fired

With the operation still going on, a police spokesperson said the number of officers injured in the incident had risen from one to three.

The exact circumstances were still unclear, however, including whether the police officers were struck by bullets or injured in another way.

Shots were fired during a counter-terror raid on a house in Forest, Brussels, a spokesman for the federal prosecutors office said.

Belgian media reports described the Forest suburb as close to the Molenbeek neighbourhood, which was home to a number of the Islamist militants confirmed as carrying out the Paris shootings.

In pictures: Paris attacks







25 show all In pictures: Paris attacks















































1/25 Paris attacks French police with protective shields walk in line near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

2/25 Paris attacks Rescuers evacuate an injured person on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire AFP

3/25 Paris attacks French Vigipirate troops mobilize next to Place de la Bastille AFP

4/25 Paris attacks French soldiers mobilize near to the Place de la Bastille AFP

5/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated outside the scene of a hostage situation at the Bataclan theatre EPA

6/25 Paris attacks People react as they gather to watch the scene near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

7/25 Paris attacks French police secure the area outside a cafe near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

8/25 Paris attacks Rescuers workers evacuate victims near the Bataclan concert hall AFP

9/25 Paris attacks French Prime Minister Manuel Valls and French President Francois Hollande attending an emergency meeting at the Interior Ministry AFP

10/25 Paris attacks Spectators invade the pitch of the Stade de France after explosions were heard outside AP

11/25 Paris attacks A man lies on the ground as French police check his identity near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

12/25 Paris attacks Police officers man a position close to the Bataclan theatre AFP

13/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France in Paris EPA

14/25 Paris attacks Two men evacuate the Place de la Republique square in Paris as a police officer looks on AFP

15/25 Paris attacks Football fans are evacuated from the Stade de France stadium

16/25 Paris attacks An armed police officer Dan Gabriel

17/25 Paris attacks The Stade de France is evacuated after reports of an explosion

18/25 Paris attacks A member of the French fire brigade aids an injured individual near the Bataclan concert hall

19/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France in Paris

20/25 Paris attacks Police are seen outside a cafe in 10th arrondissement of the French capital Paris,

21/25 Paris attacks Rescuers assist an injured man on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire, close to the Bataclan concert hall AFP

22/25 Paris attacks The scene at a restaurant in 10th arrondissement

23/25 Paris attacks The Bataclan theatre - where around 100 people are thought be held hostage

24/25 Paris attacks The Stade de France as it was evacuated

25/25 Paris attacks Forensic experts inspect the site of an attack outside the Stade de France stadium in Saint-Denis AFP

Brussels was placed on a heightened terror alert in the aftermath of the Paris attacks, which saw 130 people killed.

At the time, all schools, universities, metro services and shopping centres closed as Belgian forces hunted for terrorists apparently determined to attack the city.

The lockdown was later lifted, but a heightened terror alert has remained in place in the city.

Belgium, with a Muslim population of about 5 percent among its 11 million people, has the highest rate in Europe of citizens joining Islamist militants in Syria.