One of the survivors of last year’s deadly attacks at the Bataclan theatre has described the moment a terrorist posed as a member of the French security forces to get in the dressing room she was hiding in.

Three heavily armed Isis fighters launched an attack on the 1,500-seat Bataclan theatre on 13 November. In less than three hours, the men were dead, having killed 89 people at the concert hall and critically injuring dozens.

Kelly Le Guen, a music reporter for RockUrLife and Webzine, was among a group of 30 people trapped in what she described as a “suffocating” room for more than two hours before security forces stormed the hall.

Kelly Le Guen

At first, the terrorists made several attempts to break down the heavy door.

“We shielded the door with the furniture around us. I was standing behind a small fridge and with every loud knock the gunman gave on the door, I was pushing harder and harder against it,” Ms Le Guen told The Independent.

After a long period of silence, a man said: “Open the door, it’s the police, we’re here to rescue you.”

“It was a difficult decision, we were in doubt. After a vote by show of hands we decided against it,” she added. The decision ultimately saved their lives.

Ms Le Guen,described the evening as a “moment out-of-time”: “It seemed like time did not exist in that room. When the police finally arrived, I did not known if one or three hours had passed since we locked ourselves in.

“I was not exactly afraid to die but those long periods of silence do make you think about life and people you might leave behind. Do I have any regrets? Why was it so short? What comes after? How great it has been.

Concert-goer captures start of Bataclan attack, by admin

“After a while I realised these thoughts were not helping and tried imagining myself getting out of this room instead.”

When the police rescued the group, Ms Le Guen saw the full horror of the atrocity.

“The first thing I saw was a body lying just in front of the door. Then we had to go through the Bataclan’s main room to get out," she recalled. "There were dozens and dozens of bodies everywhere and the room had absorbed the smell of dry blood.”

A concert by British pop star Sting marked the reopening of the Bataclan on Saturday evening, with commemorations planned over the weekend. A year on, a single bullet hole in the wall of the front of the theatre serves as a reminder of the events of 13 November, as do the flowers still tied to barriers surrounding the venue

The event inspired Kelly Le Guen’s tattoo

Ms Le Guen, who went back to work straight away after the attack, has tickets for the opening night. She is glad the venue is reopening.

“I can’t wait to go and I am so glad the show is sold out on Saturday," she said. "I know some people find it disrespectful towards the victims. But I disagree.

“Imagine if every café and restaurant where someone was killed in Paris had to close. There would be no more cafes left to go to.”

The Bataclan attack was the deadliest atrocity in an evening of horror during which 40 other people were shot dead and 413 wounded across Paris, many as they sat at cafés and on restaurant terraces.

More attacks followed in July when a truck driver killed 85 people as they celebrated Bastille Day on Nice’s Promenade des Anglais seafront. The same month, two French-born radicalised teenagers slit the throat of an elderly priest in Normandy.

In pictures: Paris attacks







25 show all In pictures: Paris attacks















































1/25 Paris attacks French police with protective shields walk in line near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

2/25 Paris attacks Rescuers evacuate an injured person on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire AFP

3/25 Paris attacks French Vigipirate troops mobilize next to Place de la Bastille AFP

4/25 Paris attacks French soldiers mobilize near to the Place de la Bastille AFP

5/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated outside the scene of a hostage situation at the Bataclan theatre EPA

6/25 Paris attacks People react as they gather to watch the scene near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

7/25 Paris attacks French police secure the area outside a cafe near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

8/25 Paris attacks Rescuers workers evacuate victims near the Bataclan concert hall AFP

9/25 Paris attacks French Prime Minister Manuel Valls and French President Francois Hollande attending an emergency meeting at the Interior Ministry AFP

10/25 Paris attacks Spectators invade the pitch of the Stade de France after explosions were heard outside AP

11/25 Paris attacks A man lies on the ground as French police check his identity near the Bataclan concert hall Reuters

12/25 Paris attacks Police officers man a position close to the Bataclan theatre AFP

13/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France in Paris EPA

14/25 Paris attacks Two men evacuate the Place de la Republique square in Paris as a police officer looks on AFP

15/25 Paris attacks Football fans are evacuated from the Stade de France stadium

16/25 Paris attacks An armed police officer Dan Gabriel

17/25 Paris attacks The Stade de France is evacuated after reports of an explosion

18/25 Paris attacks A member of the French fire brigade aids an injured individual near the Bataclan concert hall

19/25 Paris attacks Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France in Paris

20/25 Paris attacks Police are seen outside a cafe in 10th arrondissement of the French capital Paris,

21/25 Paris attacks Rescuers assist an injured man on Boulevard des Filles du Calvaire, close to the Bataclan concert hall AFP

22/25 Paris attacks The scene at a restaurant in 10th arrondissement

23/25 Paris attacks The Bataclan theatre - where around 100 people are thought be held hostage

24/25 Paris attacks The Stade de France as it was evacuated

25/25 Paris attacks Forensic experts inspect the site of an attack outside the Stade de France stadium in Saint-Denis AFP

On Sunday morning, President François Hollande and Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris, will visit each of the sites of the attacks to unveil commemorative plaques, starting at the Stade de France in Saint-Denis, where the first suicide bombs were detonated.