Occupy Wall Street is spreading across the country into Chicago, Boston, Los Angeles, Baltimore and other American cities.

What began as a small group of disaffected protesters hunkered down near the financial district in New York City is quickly becoming a national, and potentially global, movement.

Will it lead to workers of the world uniting, or will it fizzle out when people get bored and hungry and the snow starts falling?

That’s a reasonable question, I think, and one without an easy answer. Occupy Wall Street is another front in what I’ve taken to calling the New Class War. This is a war on workers and the middle class.

The crash of 2008 was an assault by the super wealthy on the pensions and savings of millions of average Americans. Earlier battles had already been fought: the Bush tax cuts slashed taxes for the richest Americans while barely effecting the majority; as far back as the 1980’s the Reagan revolution should be seen as one of the first major victories in the New Class War.

Scott Walker’s union-busting efforts in Wisconsin, and Rick Snyder's similar efforts in Michigan are two more fronts in the current war. Rick Scott’s Florida is another. Public schools, public school teachers, and the very institution of an egalitarian public school system are under assault in Tea Party states across the country. This is all part of the New Class War.

Meanwhile, wealth and income disparity have risen, with just a small segment of the population controlling the vast bulk of the nation’s wealth.

Until now, the left hasn’t done much to respond beyond vague centrism from the Democratic leadership and the occasional bout of progressive activism near elections. Maybe Occupy Wall Street signifies a sea change in the left’s response to the right’s class warfare. As I’ve mentioned before, populism has a rich history in the roots of the American left. Yet for decades now, progressives have failed to truly mobilize their own base. The right has the Tea Party, and the left has, until recently, had no riposte.

I can’t predict the future. Anyone who pretends they can is selling you something. But the times do appear to be changing. Republicans are accusing the president of class warfare. It sounds a lot like someone complaining that they got hit back first.

Maybe a little class warfare is just the thing this country needs.

P.S. To be very clear, I'm not advocating actual, ahem, warfare here. My political goals are pretty mild. I want largely free markets coupled with a strong safety net so that nobody falls through the cracks. If you look at Denmark or other northern European nations, you'll see they actually have more economic freedom than we do here in the States, but they also have things like universal healthcare. I realize that some people consider universal healthcare to be class warfare - I think it's good for business, making innovation and entrepreneurship less risky for individuals, and making American firms more competitive globally.

So when I say "class warfare can be good" I mostly mean, let's take on the cronyism and the revolving door between Washington and Wall Street. Let's have free markets where government doesn't bail out too-big-to-fail banks. Let's have a compassionate country that doesn't allow its sick and poor to fall through the cracks. This isn't scary radicalism. This is good for average Americans and good for business.

Follow me on Twitter or Facebook. Read my Forbes blog here.