“You’re going to get a few wackos,” said Aaron Moses Miller, 25, a slender, unemployed man from Ridgewood, Queens, who had been in the park for 16 days. “You can’t help it in a population of this size.”

Mr. Miller, who is Jewish, said that he had not seen the man holding the anti-Semitic signs, but said: “If I had seen him, I would have said something to him. My name is Aaron Moses Miller.”

Jeff Smith, 41, part of the press team for Occupy Wall Street, assailed those who he said ascribed the views of one sign-holder to the entire movement.

Photo

“To put someone out there to say, ‘This is who the group is,’ is about as dishonest as you can be,” Mr. Smith, who is also Jewish, said. “It’s yellow journalism.”

And Marjorie Dove Kent, executive director of Jews for Racial and Economic Justice, which has taken part in the protests, said that the movement had a diffuse leadership and that individual protesters had indicated their condemnation of the sign-carrying man by shouting him down.

But much as the Tea Party movement initially grappled with accusations of racism, Occupy Wall Street has been consistently confronted with accusations of anti-Semitism. Several conservative Web sites and television programs have shown video of the sign-holder, as well as of a woman at an allied demonstration in Los Angeles who identified herself as a public school teacher and decried “Zionist Jews who are running the big banks and the Federal Reserve.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

These conservative critics have urged President Obama and Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, to retract their expressions of support for the Wall Street protests.

“Democrats were quick to single out any instances of perceived extremism among Tea Party supporters,” Sean Spicer, the communications director of the Republican National Committee, said in a statement on Tuesday. “But with Occupy Wall Street, they turn a blind eye.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

An Oct. 13 article on the Web site of Commentary, a politically conservative magazine founded by the American Jewish Committee, though no longer affiliated with it, argued that “it isn’t just a few crackpots engaging in anti-Semitism.” The article said that the “main organizer behind the movement — Adbusters editor Kalle Lasn — has a history of anti-Jewish writing.”

Mr. Lasn did not return a message left on his Adbusters office voice mail in Vancouver, British Columbia. But Patrick Bruner, another member of the Occupy Wall Street press team, said the magazine Adbusters had helped prompt the protest movement with a call for action but otherwise had “not been active at all.” He said the Occupy Wall Street movement rejected any kind of racism or hatred, but also was “open source,” meaning that anyone could take part.

Jewish groups that have sensitive antennas for eruptions of bigotry have not criticized the protesters.

Abraham H. Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League, urged the protest organizers to condemn any expressions of anti-Semitism, but said, “There are manifestations in the movement of anti-Semitism, but they are not expressing or representing a larger view.” He also pointed out that, according to his organization’s periodic polls, roughly one in six Americans believed Jews had too much power in Wall Street and the American government.

“So it’s not surprising that in a movement that deals with economic issues you’re going to get bigots that believe in this stereotype,” Mr. Foxman said. “The movement is not about Jews; it’s not about Israel. It’s about ‘the economy, stupid.’ ”