From the beginning, Occupy Wall Street has been committed to direct democracy. Anyone can participate in the General Assembly, the movement's main decision making body, by offering ideas or questioning other peoples' proposals.

"People are extremely frustrated with the process and how it is now," said protester Ronny Nunez. "The General Assemblies are great, they offer the ability for anyone to speak out, but there comes a point in which you have so many people involved in the process that it loses any sort of effectiveness."

As the movement becomes larger and its structure grows more complex, protesters are debating ways to reform the General Assembly, which many veteran protesters say has become too unwieldy.

But that model is coming under strain as the still-nascent movement becomes more organized and maps a way forward. The last few weeks have seen a proliferation of working groups devoted to tasks that include managing food and supplies, coordinating community outreach and overseeing nearly $500,000 in donations.

Nunez cited a recent General Assembly in which members of the sanitation working group sought emergency funding to purchase trash bins. Deliberations dragged on as people offered amendments, including a requirement that the protesters purchase their supplies secondhand, that "made it effectively impossible to get the funding they needed," Nunez said.

Follow us

"We're going through all these different growing pains where we're learning, and we're learning that some things work on a smaller level and some on a bigger level," Nunez said.

Spokes Council

Protesters are circulating a proposal to streamline the process with something called a Spokes Council. Under that model, the various working groups would nominate representatives to participate in the General Assembly on their behalf. The spokesperson would rotate, and during the General Assembly they would periodically conferring with their respective working groups, which would be seated behind them. The idea has already been blocked once in the General Assembly, but is set to come up again.

A protester arrived at a recent meeting of the Outreach working group to explain the proposal. The current format had become "untenable," he argued. He noted that under the Spokes Council, anyone can join a working group and thereby have a say.

"I think that's bulls-t," another protester responded, arguing that the idea endangered the movement's inclusiveness.

"In participatory democracy," the protester presenting the idea shot back, "as long as you allow access at all times you've done your bit."

Marisa Holmes, who on Monday night explained the Spokes Council idea during a meeting of the Structure working group, argued that the idea encouraged people to become more deeply invested in Occupy Wall Street by having them join working groups that are essential to the movement's day-to-day operations. Hours-long meetings where people debate the logistics of laundry, Holmes said, can vitiate the process by leading working groups to avoid the General Assembly altogether.

"The General Assembly has been an amazing body for movement building, and it enables people to have a voice for what is sometimes the first time," Holmes said. "We don't want to destroy it but we see that there's a lot of work done in a not always accountable and transparent way."

Dilemma: Preserve Participatory Structure or Become More-Efficient?