A trial that had become a rallying point for many Occupy Wall Street activists ended on Monday with a jury finding a protester guilty of assaulting a police officer at Zuccotti Park in Manhattan in 2012.

A jury of eight women and four men took less than three hours to decide that the protester, Cecily McMillan, 25, was responsible for assaulting the officer, rejecting her contention that she had reacted instinctively when he grabbed her breast during a protest on St. Patrick’s Day. Ms. McMillan had said she could not distinctly recall what happened amid the chaos of the night.

After the foreman announced the verdict in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the courtroom erupted in catcalls and derision from more than 50 of Ms. McMillan’s supporters. Several stood and shouted, “Shame, shame, shame.”

Their anger peaked when Justice Ronald A. Zweibel ordered Ms. McMillan to be held in jail until sentencing on May 19. The second-degree assault on a police officer is a felony that carries a penalty of up to seven years in prison.

Ms. McMillan, wearing a frilly white dress and a stone-colored jacket, was led away in handcuffs.

Outside the courthouse, Ms. McMillan’s lawyer, Martin R. Stolar, said the judge had made several mistakes that would become the basis of an appeal, among them excluding evidence about other protesters who claimed the same officer had abused them. “I’m extremely disappointed that an innocent woman has been convicted,” Mr. Stolar said.

Ms. McMillan was arrested on March 17, 2012, the night hundreds of people gathered to observe the founding of the Occupy Wall Street movement six months earlier. The police swept through the park in Lower Manhattan, carrying out scores of protesters, many of whom locked arms, went limp and refused to move.

The central question facing jurors was whether Ms. McMillan intentionally elbowed the officer, Grantley Bovell, in the right eye while trying to escape him as prosecutors charged, or reacted reflexively after the officer grabbed her right breast, as she maintained.

Ms. McMillan, a volunteer labor organizer going to graduate school, testified last month that she had been out drinking to celebrate St. Patrick’s Day with a college friend and they went to the park that night to meet a third friend, not to join the protest.

Officer Bovell testified he encountered Ms. McMillan flailing her arms and shouting curses at a female officer, who was never located and did not testify. Officer Bovell said he told Ms. McMillan to leave the park, and when she refused, put her hand on her shoulder to steer her out.

“I remember her saying to someone: ‘Are you filming this? Are you filming this?’ ” the officer said. “Then I remember the defendant crouching down and lunging with her elbow and hitting me in the face.”

A video corroborated Officer Bovell’s account. Ms. McMillan is seen bending her knees, then throwing her right elbow into the officer’s eye. She lurches forward, runs a few steps, then is tackled by several officers.

Ms. McMillan testified she had no recollection of hitting the officer, but recalled that she thought someone was trying to grope her. “All of a sudden I feel somebody grab me from behind, from my right breast, and pull me backward,” she said.

Mr. Stolar introduced in evidence a picture of a bruise above Ms. McMillan’s right breast that was taken a day after she was arrested. “This is the smoking gun in the case,” he said during closing arguments on Friday. “She got grabbed and she hit. That’s an accident.”

Erin Choi, an assistant district attorney, in her summation, accused Ms. McMillan of lying about Officer Bovell groping her for the sake of publicity. “She wanted to pull the wool over your eyes,” Ms. Choi told the jury.

Ms. McMillan was one of the few people arrested during the Occupy Wall Street protests who opted for a trial. Mr. Stolar said his client chose to do so because the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., would not agree to let her plead guilty to a misdemeanor.

Mr. Vance obtained indictments against seven Occupy Wall Street protesters in 2011 and 2012 on charges of assaulting police officers. Two pleaded guilty to that charge, one woman was acquitted and three were allowed to plead guilty to misdemeanor charges.

Outside the courthouse, many of Ms. McMillan’s supporters expressed their anger and frustration with the verdict; a few held up an enormous gold puppet of a Lady Justice with badly tilting scales.