You think the great global protest in a hundred cities round the world this weekend had no effect? Take a look at Monday's Financial Times leader and see how far and how fast the world is responding.

Just read this: "Today only the foolhardy would dismiss a movement reflecting the anger and frustration of ordinary citizens from all walks of life around the world … the fundamental call for a fairer distribution of wealth cannot be ignored." The American dream "has been shattered by a crisis brought about by financial excess and political cynicism. The consequence has been growing inequality, rising poverty and sacrifice by those least able to bear it – all of which are failing to deliver economic growth." It ends thus: "The cry for change is one that must be heeded." The Guardian says it often, but here's the FT saying rising inequality is not just socially but economically disastrous. The majority now know it, with no rise in living standards for years as growth is gobbled up by the greedy 1%.

From Santiago to Tokyo, Ottawa, Sarajevo and Berlin, spontaneous groups have been inspired by Occupy Wall Street. In 20 British cities and in the City, camps have been set up. This is a simple and visceral protest at the gross injustice of bailed-out banks and company CEOs still pouring bonuses into their pockets while everyone else pays the price in cuts and lost jobs. Nothing inchoate about that.

Outside St Paul's – defended by hero of the day, Canon Giles Fraser – the admirably democratic assembly drew up a nine-point proposal. People I met were of all ages and occupations, most back at work in the week, but returning at the weekend to support the core protest. Many drop by for whatever hours they can manage to join this groundswell of indignation. The Swampy count is pretty low: I met a middle-aged IT systems analyst, made redundant last September from an office in the City. A gardener from Cornwall, returning on the Sunday-night coach, said she'd be back next weekend. An FE college tutor said hundreds fewer students had signed up this term as the axing of educational maintenance allowance made travelling costs impossible from far afield. A graduate unemployed for over a year has an interview next week to volunteer at a charity – a step towards a job, but he worried how to support himself without pay. Plenty more were laden with debt and no jobs. A couple from Northampton said both their graduate children were working in bars at night, job-hunting fruitlessly by day.

I had a fierce argument on Sunday on Sky News with the Taxpayers' Alliance political director: when he said "they should be getting jobs instead of protesting", I realised the extent to which the right is losing the plot. A million young people are jobless – a number rising fast. Taxpayers are the 99% who paid trillions to cover financiers' risk-taking greed yet are left with higher taxes, higher prices, cut services and a 7% real fall in living standards. The Taxpayers' Alliance is stranded, representing the interests of the 1%, the Tory party donors, the FTSE board members. The world of lobbyists exposed in the Guardian, the rightwing nexus of influence and backhanders revealed by the Werritty affair, makes what the protesters are saying mainstream to most people. Even in America, riven between Tea Party and Obama Democrat politics, a Time poll found 54% of people view the Occupy Wall Street protest favourably and 25% "very positively". The raw nerve of populism is with these protests.

I watched the laborious process of getting a crowd of more than 500 to agree detailed wording with one feeble microphone, repeating the words to those at the back. But from difficult democracy came good broad proposals.

"We refuse to pay for the banks' crisis. We do not accept the cuts as either necessary or inevitable. We demand an end to global tax injustice and our democracy representing corporations instead of the people. We want regulators to be genuinely independent of the industries they regulate. We support the strike on 30 November and the student action on 9 November, and actions to defend our health services, welfare, education and employment, and to stop wars and arms dealing. We want structural change towards authentic global equality. The world's resources must go towards caring for people and the planet, not the military, corporate profits or the rich." This is a preliminary "work in progress" they all agreed, waving their hands in assent.

That's not crazy anti-capitalism, that's a set of principles many would support. Is it a finely worked out plan B? No, but no one else has much of one either. Labour's five-point plan is at the other end of the spectrum, small, timid and unlikely to stir popular enthusiasm. Ed Miliband's conference speech began to feel its way towards something bolder, but where are the daily follow-ups from the rest of his team?

In an opposition debate last week, Ed Balls's speech on the economy was good Vaudeville stuff – but without catching this authentic outrage. His caution suggests he has been too long in Treasury corridors to realise opposition is not government. Labour needs to forget the past, forget its own culpability and oppose full throttle to catch the mood of these times. There's little to lose: if the protesters – and the FT – are right, Labour will look feeble and may be overtaken by more populist movements. If the protesters are wrong and Osborne's economic policy is right, then Labour's toast anyway.

The New York Times has just blow-torched Tory economic policy in an editorial warning to the US: "For a year now, Britain's economy has been stuck in a vicious cycle of low growth, high unemployment and fiscal austerity. But unlike Greece, which has been forced into induced recession by misguided European Union creditors, Britain has inflicted this harmful quack cure on itself. Austerity was a deliberate ideological choice … Britain's unhappy experience is further evidence that radical reductions in federal spending will do little but stifle economic recovery."

Ernst & Young and the Centre for Economics and Business Research have just cut UK growth forecasts for next year to a dismal 0.9% and 0.7%. Before anyone dismisses these protests as pie-in-the-sky idealism, just look at the utter disaster of current orthodox Treasury/Tory policies. Join the protest for what time you can spare, donate and support them here: occupylondon.org.uk.