About

Occupy Wall Street is a people-powered movement that began on September 17, 2011 in Liberty Square in Manhattan’s Financial District, and has spread to over 100 cities in the United States and actions in over 1,500 cities globally. #ows is fighting back against the corrosive power of major banks and multinational corporations over the democratic process, and the role of Wall Street in creating an economic collapse that has caused the greatest recession in generations. The movement is inspired by popular uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia, and aims to fight back against the richest 1% of people that are writing the rules of an unfair global economy that is foreclosing on our future.

OccupyWallSt.org is the oldest and most trusted online resource for the Occupy Movement. We were founded on July 14th, 2011 when Justine Tunney organized a scrappy group of anarchists to take the initiative in organizing a call to action published by Micah White in Adbusters magazine.

Some Leaders of a Leaderless (and Leader-full) Movement

OccupyWallSt.org is operated by The Occupy Solidarity Network, Inc. (OSN) a New York 501(c)(4) not-for-profit organization.

Micah M. White, PhD

MICAH WHITE, PhD is the award-winning activist who co-created Occupy Wall Street, a contagious social protest that spread to eighty-two countries, while an editor of Adbusters magazine. His essays and interviews on the future of protest have been published internationally in periodicals including The Los Angeles Review of Books, The New York Times, The Guardian and Folha de São Paulo.

Widely recognized as a pioneer of social movement creation, White has been profiled by The New Yorker, and Esquire has named him one of the most influential young thinkers alive today.

Micah White's first book, The End of Protest: A New Playbook for Revolution, was published by Knopf Canada.

What does Occupy stand for?

Here are some documents published in New York that have been well received by the movement:

Copying

Occupy Wall Street is committed to “making technologies, knowledge, and culture open to all to freely access, create, modify, and distribute.” In that spirit, we welcome journalists, activists, educators and others to make free use of all original content authored by OccupyWallSt.org. As thanks, we ask only that you provide a link back to this site.

Solidarity Forever!