The cash is burning a hole in their pockets.

As the Occupy Wall Street movement loses steam, protesters are pitching new and creative ways to spend the $300,000 remaining in the kitty.

The group now raises just a few hundred bucks a day, down sharply from the tens of thousands that poured in daily at its height in November.

All told, it took in $706,855.91 in donations between Oct. 1 and Jan. 4. Much of what was already spent went to food, laundry, supplies and MetroCards.

Among the suggestions aired at recent OWS meetings on how to slice up the Occu-pie were:

Post photo composite

1 Withdraw all the money in hundred-dollar bills, stuff the Benjamins in canvas bags and torch the cash in a bonfire on Wall Street. The incendiary proposal was dropped.

2 Split the loot among occupiers. “A lot of people aren’t thinking it’s such a crazy idea anymore,” one said. The twice-proposed measure was also withdrawn.

3 Buy a $150,000 piece of real estate for homeless protesters to live in. “At least 100 homeless people held down the center of our movement in Zuccotti Park by staying there and occupying the ground 24/7,” one homeless occupier wrote in a proposal, which also was withdrawn.

4 Spend $9,500 to break into a foreclosed home on Vermont Street in Brooklyn, fix it up and move a family back in. An OWS general assembly approved this outlay last month and it was done.

5 Invest $15,000 in a 56-acre farm near upstate Woodstock to provide food for the Occupation. “Move out of the parks and onto the farms!” one pitch read. This proposal has been tabled for now, but it but is expected to pass.

6 Pour $14,500 into an “East Coast Solidarity Tour,” where 10 members would embark on a monthlong road trip in a $2,500 green bus to educate other Occupations. That measure also was withdrawn.

7 Cut the kitchen budget. During a meeting on Thursday, some Occupiers curdled over the kitchen team’s claims it was spending $10,500 a week. They want to see receipts.

8 March like an Egyptian. OWS actually approved a $29,000 trip to Egypt for 20 members to show solidarity right before Zuccotti was shut down in November. The trip was canceled after the police raid.

9 Occupy the New Hampshire primary. The $1,900 trip is meant to disrupt “candidates events and other targets not associated with the voting process,” according to the proposal, which was approved.

10 Set aside $100,000 to help jailed comrades. “This is an effort to ensure that we are able to continue to post bail for those arrested going into the spring,” the tabled proposal read.

cgiove@nypost.com