Last weekend “Occupy Wall Street” extended its roots around the globe. According to organizers there were organized events in 950 cities around the world, and protests in cities like Frankfurt, Rome and Lisbon took as many as 100,000 to the streets, with injuries reported in Italy and Spain.

More than 5,000 protestors gathered in Frankfurt outside the headquarters of the European Central Bank. Others gathered in Munich and the northern city of Hamburg, where they braved a cold night Sunday after setting up camp outside the HSH Nordbank headquarters.

In Germany, while they are based on the same movement, the protests hit a slightly different note. In downtown New York, where protests fomented, capitalism is held accountable for the dire conditions that a majority of Americans face amid high unemployment and a credit collapse that has ruined the housing market and tightened lending among banks. In Germany, an argument against capitalism is more easily compared with an argument for communism, which is a recent memory, especially for those Germans who lived in the former East German state.

Responses to the protests in the U.S. have been mixed, with supporters like Pimco’s CEO Mohamed El-Erian, who urged people to pay attention to the protestors’ greviences, George Soros, and Warren Buffett’s son, all expressing at least sympathy with the movement.

A response from a prominent political mind in Germany drew surprise this week when he called the anti-capitalist protests taking place in Germany “unspeakably silly.”

The protests will fade away fast, said Joachim Gauck in a conference this week according to the German newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung on Monday. Gauck is an independent political thinker from the former east who was a strong opponent of the communist government, and who was nominated by the left-leaning SPD party in 2010 to run for president of Germany.

“I lived in a state where the banks were occupied,” Gauck said. The ideal that our lives would be better-lived in a world that wasn’t connected to markets is a romantic one, he said according to the SZ. Regarding the inclination of Germans to wage protests in the 21st century, he suggested that they flame up late, when problems “arrive in our front gardens.”

For these protestors, the act of questioning some of capitalism’s visages is not silly at all. “It is against the banks, it is against financial powers in the system, it is about profits being before people,” said Wolfram Siener, a speaker for “Occupy Frankfurt” in Berlin’s Der Tagesspiegel.

“This sort of thing falls short of communism to all but those who have grown accustomed to having a bail-out when they place bad bets,” said Irwin Collier, professor of economics at Free University in Berlin.

This week discussions between euro zone economic leaders floated the idea to use the European Financial Stability Facility to guarantee bond issuance from troubled countries in a capacity that could raise the lending power of the EFSF to over 1 trillion euros. (See “Euro Leaders Face Important Decision“) This may only be the minimum required to save the euro from a domino-style bail-out of the ailing economies, led by Greece. The ground for debate over the economic policies of the European Union has never been more fallow. It is uncertain how long protests like “Occupy Wall Street” will last.