Occupy Wall Street vows to carry on after arrests OCCUPY WALL STREET









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});







window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-9', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 9', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});











Photo: Albert Sabate, Associated Press Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close Image 1 of 9 An unidentified Occupy Wall Street protester is arrested early Sunday, March 18, 2012 in Zuccotti Park after a march in celebration of the protest's sixth month, on Saturday, in New York. With the city's attention focused on the huge St. Patrick's Day Parade many blocks uptown, the Occupy rally drew a far smaller crowd than the demonstrations when the movement was at its peak in the fall. (AP Photo/Albert Sabate) less An unidentified Occupy Wall Street protester is arrested early Sunday, March 18, 2012 in Zuccotti Park after a march in celebration of the protest's sixth month, on Saturday, in New York. With the city's ... more Photo: Albert Sabate, Associated Press Image 2 of 9 A closed Zuccotti Park is cleaned in New York, Sunday, March 18, 2012. Dozens of police officers cleared the park late Saturday and early Sunday where the Occupy movement was born six months ago and made several arrests after hundreds of protesters returned in an anniversary observance and defiantly resisted calls to clear out. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig) less A closed Zuccotti Park is cleaned in New York, Sunday, March 18, 2012. Dozens of police officers cleared the park late Saturday and early Sunday where the Occupy movement was born six months ago and made ... more Photo: Seth Wenig, Associated Press Image 3 of 9 Occupy Wall Street demonstrators march near Zuccotti Park on Saturday, March 17, 2012, in New York. With the city's attention focused on the huge St. Patrick's Day Parade many blocks uptown, the Occupy rally at Zuccotti Park on Saturday drew a far smaller crowd than the demonstrations seen in the city when the movement was at its peak in the fall. A couple hundred people attended. (AP Photo/John Minchillo) less Occupy Wall Street demonstrators march near Zuccotti Park on Saturday, March 17, 2012, in New York. With the city's attention focused on the huge St. Patrick's Day Parade many blocks uptown, the Occupy rally at ... more Photo: John Minchillo, Associated Press Image 4 of 9 A worker cleans Zuccotti Park March 18, 2012 after Occupy Wall Street demonstrators were cleared from the park the previous night in New York. A few hundred had gathered to mark the 6th month anniversary of the protests and were moved by police when some tried to set up tents. AFP PHOTO/Stan HONDA (Photo credit should read STAN HONDA/AFP/Getty Images) less A worker cleans Zuccotti Park March 18, 2012 after Occupy Wall Street demonstrators were cleared from the park the previous night in New York. A few hundred had gathered to mark the 6th month anniversary of the ... more Photo: Stan Honda, AFP/Getty Images Image 5 of 9 Image 6 of 9 Graffiti written in chalk seen in Zuccotti Park March 18, 2012 after Occupy Wall Street demonstrators were cleared from the park the previous night in New York. A few hundred had gathered to mark the 6th month anniversary of the protests and were moved by police when some tried to set up tents. AFP PHOTO/Stan HONDA (Photo credit should read STAN HONDA/AFP/Getty Images) less Graffiti written in chalk seen in Zuccotti Park March 18, 2012 after Occupy Wall Street demonstrators were cleared from the park the previous night in New York. A few hundred had gathered to mark the 6th month ... more Photo: Stan Honda, AFP/Getty Images Image 7 of 9 REMOVES REFERENCE TO OCCUPY WALL STREET PROTESTOR - Robert Neuwirth types on an old-fashioned typewriter as part of an art project in Zuccotti Park before a march to celebrate the protest's sixth month, Saturday, March 17, 2012, in New York. With the city's attention focused on the huge St. Patrick's Day Parade many blocks uptown, the Occupy rally at Zuccotti Park on Saturday drew a far smaller crowd than the demonstrations seen in the city when the movement was at its peak in the fall. A couple hundred people attended. (AP Photo/John Minchillo) less REMOVES REFERENCE TO OCCUPY WALL STREET PROTESTOR - Robert Neuwirth types on an old-fashioned typewriter as part of an art project in Zuccotti Park before a march to celebrate the protest's sixth month, ... more Photo: John Minchillo, Associated Press Image 8 of 9 A closed Zuccotti Park is cleaned in New York, Sunday, March 18, 2012. Dozens of police officers cleared the park late Saturday and early Sunday where the Occupy movement was born six months ago and made several arrests after hundreds of protesters returned in an anniversary observance and defiantly resisted calls to clear out. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig) less A closed Zuccotti Park is cleaned in New York, Sunday, March 18, 2012. Dozens of police officers cleared the park late Saturday and early Sunday where the Occupy movement was born six months ago and made ... more Photo: Seth Wenig, Associated Press Image 9 of 9 Occupy Wall Street vows to carry on after arrests 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

New York --

A day after police broke up a rally at Manhattan's Zuccotti Park and arrested dozens, Occupy Wall Street protesters said Sunday that their movement for economic justice would pick up momentum with the spring.

Activists listed issues including student debt, the environment and the November elections as priorities going forward.

The crackdown at Zuccotti happened late Saturday after hundreds of activists had gathered to mark the sixth-month birthday of the movement.

"There was a lot of silliness and just kind of singing and dancing and really very jovial," said Chris Casuccio, who works for a nonprofit organization. "There was one tarp that was up but it was tiny."

LATEST SFGATE VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing Woman hit by Sacramento sheriff's deputy vehicle during Stephon Clark protest Guy Danilowitz

The wettest and driest places in the Bay Area Ted Andersen, Alix Martichoux, SFGATE

The Regulars: The Mushroom Hacker Nani Walker, Robin Simmonds and Lauren Schwartzman

Candy Land: How West Oakland's Ocho Candy Makes Its Organic Sweet Treats Sarah Fritsche

Bernal Heights hit-and-run San Francisco Chronicle

Woman's car plunges 300 feet off cliff near Pacifica California Highway Patrol

SF Brewing Co. Ghirardelli Square Virtual Tour San Francisco Chronicle

The story behind You're Going to Die, SF's death-related open mike San Francisco Chronicle

Protesting the death of Stephon Clark: ‘You murdered a Son’ New York Times

David Nayfeld making pasta San Francisco Chronicle

But Detective Brian Sessa of the NYPD said protesters had started breaking park rules against setting up tents and tarps. Police said 73 people were detained. It was unclear how many were still in custody Sunday.

Occupy activists said the officers moved in with little warning and beat some protesters. Police said Sunday they had no information about any protesters being injured.

"They just came in swinging batons," said protester Sandra Nurse. She said a woman began having a seizure and another protester's head was "smashed into a building window."

Casuccio said protesters had little time to leave if they wanted to avoid arrest. "They gave us one quick warning and then just came in," he said.

Police did not immediately answer calls and e-mails Sunday seeking a response to the accusations of brutality.

As cleaning crews used hoses to erase all signs of the clash on Sunday, Occupy activists offered differing perspectives on where the movement is headed.

"We're going to keep going," said Christopher Guerra, who has spent many nights at Zuccotti since the movement started Sept. 17. He added, "It's going to get interesting during the election cycle. We're going to be more of a presence in the political world. I know we have a couple of people running for office."

According to Mother Jones magazine, 10 candidates for House and Senate seats in the November elections have made Occupy part of their campaigns. They include Massachusetts Senate candidate Elizabeth Warren and Hakeem Jeffries, who is running for Congress in Brooklyn. But some Occupy supporters consider themselves anarchists who abjure electoral politics.

Ted Schulman, an Occupy protester who lives near Zuccotti, said his focus is the upcoming U.N. Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. He said he wants to "challenge the U.N. on what their vision of a green economy is."

Harlem resident Kanene Holder said the movement is broader than any one issue. "This is not a beauty pageant," she said. "We cannot homogenize this movement into one streamlined vision."