On a recent Wednesday, Olivett Tisson, a rising senior at the Urban Assembly Institute of Math and Science for Young Women, in Brooklyn, stood with a group of her classmates at the edge of Cadman Plaza Park, holding a stack of leaflets. “I’m not the type of person to go out and, like, protest,” she said. “I keep to myself.”

“It’s kind of scary for me to go up to people,” Nande Trant, fifteen, said. “I’m shy. Most of the time when I have opinions, I don’t know how to get them out.”

“But I’m on Tumblr all the time,” Tisson said. “Eric Garner, the Confederate flag—I see the things that are going on.”

“I know about catching people’s attention,” Shavonnie Victor, another rising senior, said. “But the denial is something I have to get used to. You go up to someone, and they’re, like, ‘Nah, I’m going to keep walking.’ I’m thinking, This is going to affect someone you love!”

The girls were spending the morning chasing after pedestrians as part of a pilot program at U.A.I., a class on the fundamentals of organizing and protest. Eighty-five per cent of the students at the school are from what the state identifies as low-income homes. More than ninety per cent of last year’s graduates went on to college.

“My girls are freaking awesome, but they’re trapped in teen-age bodies,” Kiri Soares, the school’s principal, said later. A year ago, she noticed that the girls “would have these really deep-seated feelings about unjust things that were happening to them, but they don’t always know how to identify or articulate it.” An activist friend named Cathy O’Neil suggested that Soares start the class, which they call Occupy Summer School. Union members, political economists, and organizers drop in to discuss protest strategies.

O’Neil is a mathematician and former hedge-fund analyst who became disillusioned with finance during the credit crisis. (“I was Larry Summers’s quant,” she’s said. “It thickened my skin quite a bit.”) For nearly four years, she’s led a weekly working group on alternative banking and social justice at Columbia University.

Most of the U.A.I. summer students were familiar with the Black Lives Matter campaign, but at the start of the summer only one or two had heard much about Occupy Wall Street. As part of the course, the students had to design their own protest. They decided to take on gender inequality. “We’re an all-female school,” Victor told the class. “We’re going to protest the things that we see because we’re females. Bam!”

The initial idea had been to engage passersby with a bake sale at which men would be charged a dollar for a cupcake or a brownie and women would be charged seventy-eight cents. The girls hoped this would spark conversations about wage discrimination. After some calling around, the class grew concerned that it might be illegal (O’Neil had promised that no one would get arrested), so they tweaked the plan. They made signs advertising the theoretical price disparity but gave the sweets away for free, the only cost being a few minutes’ conversation. They handed out balloons with the leaflets to draw people to their table.

At eleven, a skinny bearded man hopped off his bike and took a cupcake. Looking at the signs, he volunteered that he was a college professor and that many of his students were single mothers. “Don’t underestimate the power of a woman,” Victor told him. “They want to provide.” She brought up the Eric Garner case. “If I stand on the corner wearing a hoodie, I don’t want to feel like someone’s going to look at me, like, ‘What is she doing?’ ” she said.

The cyclist was sympathetic. “Nobody in the neighborhood is complaining. Only the police are complaining.”

Victor went on, “You don’t know what people think in their head. I don’t know if I walk up to someone, and they’re thinking, like, Ugh, look at that black girl.”

The cyclist asked, “Do you think maybe they just don’t want to hear about problems?”

“That’s the thing,” Victor said. “They’re already thinking, This is not my problem. But it’s everyone’s problem. One guy I approached today didn’t care about it. But he had a daughter sitting right next to him in a stroller!”

Trant was reflective. “A lot of people want change, but they don’t really want to do much about it,” she said. “So it’s kind of, I did my part—they’ve got to do theirs.”

The baked goods were almost gone, and the girls looked across the park. “There’s a lot of balloons out there,” Victor said. “If that represents the amount of people we got to talk to us, then we did good today.” ♦