The Occupy Wall Street protest is now in its third week and continuing to grow. A large group continues to camp out in Zuccotti Park in Lower Manhattan, near Wall Street, and supporters have launched satellite protests across the country, from Boston to Los Angeles .

The International Business Times spoke with Heather Gautney, a sociology professor at Fordham University in New York City, about the significance of the protest so far and where it might go from here.

In New York , the police seem to have reached a tacit agreement not to remove the protesters from Zuccotti Park, choosing instead to arrest people when they leave the park to demonstrate elsewhere. For instance, when the protesters marched across the Brooklyn Bridge on Saturday, several hundred were arrested for blocking vehicle lanes.

Heather Gautney: I've written about and been active in the global justice movement, and I think a lot of this stuff is emanating from that. One of the benefits of not having these sorts of leaders was, we said, there was no head to chop off. When you don't have those couple of charismatic people, then you don't have that problem of, if the police arrest your leader or if that person becomes incapacitated in any kind of way, the movement kind of falls apart. That said, the movement doesn't have leaders, but it certainly has organizers, and there are certainly people providing a human structure to this thing. There might not be these kinds of public leaders, but there are people running it, and I think that's inevitable.

Follow us

[Then there is the] ability to sort of move away from any kind of targeting that police or government might want to engage in. This is another thing that's coming out of this previous [global justice] movement, is that there's a real desire to avoid the hypocrisy that's been present in other movements in terms of recreating authoritarian structures. There's this desire to be radically democratic, to avoid the vanguardism of previous Western movements and to rotate these organizational positions and give everyone an experience of engaging democratically and being part of the decision-making process. There's a real integrity in the actual functioning of the moment, and that's in agreement more with the message of the movement as a democracy.

The drawbacks are, the meetings take forever -- they're tedious and it takes a very long time to make decisions. With any kind of operating according to consensus, it just takes hours to agree on even some of the most minor points, so that can be a real problem. It can be an inefficient way of making decisions, and in protest situations, sometimes you need to have some of those last-minute kinds of processes. Another drawback is that the unity of the message can get diluted. [The protesters are] really making significant strides toward overcoming that problem by issuing lists of demands, but the process by which those demands have been arrived at has been a long, tedious process because you've opened it up to so many people.

You asked if it was effective. In terms of efficiency of decision-making, maybe not, but I do think that there has been in this, Occupy Wall Street -- however the leaderless aspect has been operating, I think it's been very effective in communicating with the media, I think their internal organization has been very effective, and I think they've been effective in generating an energy that we haven't really seen in a while. Time will tell whether or not they'll be effective in actually getting people at higher levels, at mainstream political levels, to actually pay attention to their demands.

IBTimes: You've said that Occupy Wall Street could gain similar momentum to the Arab Spring protests in Egypt, and that's certainly what the protesters have alluded to by saying they want to turn Wall Street into Tahrir Square. What makes you think that's possible?

Gautney: I have ambivalent feelings about it, to be honest. I think on the one hand, the momentum could grow, as in the case of the Egyptian situation. There seems to be this kind of desire to assert power, and I think there are some similarities in terms of the movements' goals of empowering everyday people, even though the systems are quite different. The fundamental difference is with this movement, if there are the same kind of members, they're going to be very decentralized. [There have been] protests in Boston, on the west coast -- there will be these kind of decentralized expressions, but I don't think we're going to see the kind of concentrated, millions of people in one place every day like in the Arab Summer.

There are interesting similarities -- like you said, the protesters were inspired by what was going on in the Arab world, and I think that's significant. Some similarities -- the unemployment rate was about 10 percent in Egypt particularly, and we're pretty close to that here in this country. So while you have dissimilar political conditions, and of course the societies are different, there are some comparative aspects in terms of the kinds of discontent and the kinds of problems unemployment can cause in a society. [And also,] when people are unemployed, they actually have time to protest.

There is that kind of similarity, but I don't think the form is going to be similar. Our country is way too large and way too decentralized to see those large, concentrated numbers.

IBTimes: Both Occupy Wall Street and the Egyptian movement call(ed) for broad, long-term social change, but unlike Occupy Wall Street, the Egyptian protests had a specific short-term goal: to force Mubarak to step down. While Occupy Wall Street has a number of specific criticisms, it doesn't have a concrete short-term goal like that. What do you think would be an ideal outcome for the protesters? What would constitute success?

Gautney: It's tough, because I think you're absolutely right. In the Egyptian context, it was clear. There were social aspects to that, but it was a political movement, and this is -- Occupy Wall Street, I think it's really just starting to define what would constitute success. I think there's an aspect of success in just getting people onto the street in a country where that's not the normal state of political expression. There's success in the fact that you have people going crazy all over the Internet, reading things and actually thinking about these issues and concerning themselves with these issues. I think the media response has been remarkable. [The media is often dismissive,] and I think there is that element, but there's also an aspect of, "Hey, this might be something." I think when you capture the imagination of the media and the sympathy of the media, then you have quite the resource. The media is an important part of the way the public expresses itself.