Let’s assume Rolando Nichols isn’t going to be mistaken for Joe Buck. And then take what happened outside of Minute Maid Park in Houston before Friday’s Game 3 of the World Series between the Dodgers and Astros as reinforcement of that assumption.

Nichols, the Fox Deportes play-by-play man was about to head into the park to start his broadcasting day with game analyst Carlos Alvarez when a fan approached them asking for free tickets.

Not because the guy recognized them as broadcasters. He thought these two in their suits and ties were umpires.

If Nichols couldn’t have had a laugh about it, he wouldn’t have posted the story on his Twitter and Instagram account.

No mistaking the fact Nichols fills an important role in the 2017 Serie Mundial coverage. The 42-year-old living with his family in Manhattan Beach may be better recognized the Latino community as a longtime Univision news anchor is calling his third MLB championship for Deportes, but he’s back in baseball after doing the 2009 and ’10 seasons as the Angels’ Spanish-language radio play-by-play man.

His childhood ties are to the Dodgers, growing up in Hermosillo, Sonora in Mexico near the Arizona border, listening to Jaime Jarrin call Fernando Valenzuela’s games while knowing the left-hander was from the same state in the town of Etchohuaquila.

His professional baseball broadcasting ties go to the Astros, having started as a Spanish-language play-by-play man for the franchise’s Triple-A Tucson Toros, once calling a game of theirs in the Houston Astrodome.

His current ties are a connection to a Latino/Hispanic community that knows its beisbol.

“You cannot underestimate their knowledge, which I think really makes us all perform at the highest level,” Nichols said Saturday morning before Game 4.

“It’s a huge responsibility we take very seriously. It’s not just bilingual families, but multi-generational – grandparents and parents who may not speak perfect English and want to watch in Spanish alongside the younger kids. I see it at my own house – my 19-year-old son from Manhattan Beach (a baseball player at Cerritos College), watching with my mom and step-dad as well as my wife (Wende).

“We connect with so many people in countries as well like Guatemala, El Salvador, a huge Colombian community. We see it all the time on social media. And we’re also fortunate to have great chemistry in the booth.”

Nichols is paired with Alvarez, who has Fox Sports play-by-play experience, as well as Edgar Gonzalez, the brother of Dodgers first baseman Adrian Gonzalez and manager of Mexico’s team in the World Baseball Classic.

Fox Deportes’ coverage so far for the World Series is averaging 373,000 total viewers, up almost 30 percent over last year’s Cubs-Indians matchup and more than 90 percent than 2015.

FROM THE FIELD TO THE BOOTH

A second baseman with the Mexican National team who moved to Tucson at age 16, returning to play pro ball in Mexico City and Vera Cruz, Nichols diverted to pursue a journalism career at Arizona State’s Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication that went beyond just what happened in front of the camera. His passion for learning the technical side of things once led him to starting his own school to train aspiring TV production talent. For the last 10 years he also has a full-time business with his Torrance-based Hollywood Riviera Studios and HRS Mobile company, a mobile production unit that does many MMA, boxing, soccer and eSports broadcasts. HBO, Univision and Fox are also among his clients.

Jose Mota, the Angels’ most valuable bilingual broadcaster who helped bring Nichols to work for the franchise, calls him someone who “always relates to the audience because he played the game and he had all that experience as a newscaster, which allows him to present the game with an easy flow.

“My experience with him on Angels Spanish radio was one where I’ll always remember how we could broadcast a game while having a baseball conversation the entire time. We could be talking baseball history, Latin American history, youth baseball, coaching baseball and so many other topics that we both related to. He’s always had a good feel for the Latino community and the issues that are current, and that also enabled him to connect to the non-sports audience.”

Nichols, who has been in Rome covering papal coronations, says he’s “as addicted to news as to baseball,” constantly monitoring CNN and Fox News as much as MLB Network, ESPN and Fox Sports because “I want to understand the issues in the community from immigration to the effects of Hurricane Harvey.”

The bonus of this World Series for Nichols is seeing Jarrin, the 81-year-old and 1998 Ford C. Frick winner from Ecuador calling his 10th Fall Classic as a Dodger broadcaster in his 59th season.

“I learn so much just from watching and listening to so many people – and I’m not afraid to say that, because I admire their work and discipline and their commitment to their craft,” said Nichols. “I could be standing next to them, and they don’t know my name or who I am, but I can pick things up and apply them to my broadcast.

“But with Jaime, he has become a dear friend and I’ve learned so much from him. I got to interview him for our pregame show to start the World Series. And I’ll never forget, he sent a note to me on Twitter congratulating me on my work (at last summer’s All-Star Game). That almost brought me to tears coming from him.”

Que placer escuchar a @RolandoNichols en el juego de estrellas.Relato elegante,ritmo a mi gusto,profesionalismo y conocimientos.Congrats Fox — Jaime Jarrín (@JaimeJarrin) July 13, 2017

MEASURING MEDIA MAYHEM

WHAT SMOKES

== At a time when sports TV ratings continue to show declines based on more and more watching online or through smart phones, the updated Nielsen numbers for Fox’s national coverage indicate that the 2017 World Series is the first one since 1999 (Yankees-Braves on NBC) to post consecutive viewership increases from Game 1 (14.966 million) to Game 2 (15.48 million), and then from Game 2 to Game 3 (15.66 million). That ’99 Series, however, went from 22 million to 22.8 million to 24.1 million for those keeping score. The ’17 Series so far is 17 percent below last year’s 18.6 million average viewers and down to a 8.9 rating from 10.8 a year ago.

WHAT CHOKES

== “It’s a shame I get asked about fabrications and nonsense,” Astros manager A.J. Hinch had to tell reporters this week following a report in TMZ that he was involved in a bar incident after Game 1 at the team hotel in Pasadena. The same TMZ decided to pounce on Vin Scully after his Game 2 appearance and ask him about whether he’d consider coming back. Yes, it’s the same TMZ whose TV shows air on Fox as well as FS1, the network carrying the MLB postseason.

== Scully said in an interview this week with Petros Papadakis and Matt “Money” Smith on the Dodgers’ KLAC-AM (570) that “I don’t expect to be back out on the field or do anything like that again,” following up on the Game 2 first-pitch ceremony. “It was a remarkable conclusion to a career.” Understandable, but …