Bottom 6th: Seager goes deep on Verlander.

Justin Verlander needed just four pitches to retire Chase Utley and pinch-hitter Andre Ethier on a pair of fly-outs to center to start the inning, but that is when the trouble started. He walked Chris Taylor — his second walk of the game, both of which were drawn by Taylor — and got ahead, 0-2, on Corey Seager, but a 97 mile-per-hour fastball was right down the middle and Seager wasted no time hitting it out of the park to give his team the lead. Justin Turner popped out to end the inning, but the mighty Dodgers bullpen now has a lead to work with, which could be a big problem for Houston.

Waldstein: Did that seem like a familiar script? A two-out walk to Chris Taylor and then a two-run homer to left by the next batter? In Game 1 it was Justin Turner with the smash. In Game 2 it was Corey Seager, who went opposite field with a pitch that Verlander left up in the zone. And Seager knew it was gone — or at least had a good chance — right away because he was screaming as the ball left the bat.

All of the Dodgers’ runs so far in the series have come on four home runs.

Now L.A. is 12 outs away from taking a 2-0 lead in the series by beating the Astros’ two best pitchers, and the Dodgers have a favorable pitching matchup in Game 3.

Top 7th: Dodgers’ bullpen stays strong.

Ross Stripling was the fourth Dodgers pitcher of the game and he lasted just four pitches, each of which was a ball. The walk to the struggling Marwin Gonzalez resulted in yet another pitching change, with Brandon Morrow coming in to face Josh Reddick, and the right-hander came through in a big way by getting Reddick to ground into a double play. He allowed a single to Evan Gattis, who was pinch-hitting for Justin Verlander, but finished off the inning by inducing a grounder to short from George Springer.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

With Verlander now out of the game, his final line was six innings, two hits and three earned runs. He struck out five and walked two.

Bottom 7th: Harris Keeps it close for Astros.

With Will Harris on in relief for Houston, Cody Bellinger led off the inning and reached on a throwing error. He advanced to second on a curveball in the dirt that was ruled a wild pitch and went to third on a groundout by Yasiel Puig. But with the infield in to try to prevent a run, Joc Pederson struck out on five pitches. The infield returned to their normal positioning with two outs and Harris struck out Austin Barnes to end the inning.

Photo

Top 8th: Astros cut into Dodgers’ lead.

Dave Roberts continued to be aggressive with pitching changes, but for the first time in the series he did not quite have the magic touch as the Astros narrowed the Dodgers’ lead to 3-2.

After Alex Bregman led off the inning with a ground-rule double off Brandon Morrow, Roberts turned to his closer, Kenley Jansen, hoping for a six-out save. Jansen was able to get a groundout from Jose Altuve, but Bregman advanced to third on that play and then scored on a single by Carlos Correa. Jansen recovered to get a pop-out from Yulieski Gurriel and then ended the inning by striking out Brian McCann. Unless the Dodgers can extend the lead in the bottom of the 8th, Jansen will have just one run to work with in the ninth.

Waldstein: The Astros finally break through against the Dodgers bullpen, which had not surrendered a run in 28 consecutive innings in the postseason.

Jansen, who is being asked to get a 6-out save, was 41 for 42 in save opportunities in the regular season. He had one five-out save this year and earned a win in a two-inning performance in extra innings. He has a five-out save and a four-out save this postseason.

Bottom 8th: Dodgers riding Jansen for six-out save.

It was a quick inning for the Dodgers offense. Chase Utley flew out to left, pinch-hitter Kike Hernandez grounded out to short, and Chris Taylor flew out to left to end the inning.

The Dodgers are three outs away from a 2-0 lead in the series with their dominant closer, Kenley Jansen, trying to finish a six-out save.

Photo

Top 9th: Gonzalez breaks out of slump to tie game.

Kenley Jansen only had one six-out save in his career coming into today’s game, and he will leave with only one after he allowed a game-tying solo homer to Marwin Gonzalez to start the ninth inning.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After the home run, Jansen got a quick out from Josh Reddick, who popped out to second, and retired pinch-hitter Carlos Beltran on a fly ball to center, but he allowed a two-out double to George Springer. With the go-ahead run on base, Jansen was able to stop the bleeding by retiring Alex Bregman on a grounder to short.

With the Dodgers already having used five relievers, including their three best, they could run into manpower issues if this tie game stretches on for a while.

Waldstein: It was only Jansen’s second blown save of the year. His first was July 23 in Atlanta when he gave up a game-tying, three-run home run to Matt Adams. But the Dodgers came back to win that game, 5-4, and are 98-0 when leading after 8 innings this year, including the postseason.

Bottom 9th: Bellinger’s blast ends at warning track.

Houston turned to their closer in the ninth and Ken Giles started things off by striking out Corey Seager. He retired Justin Turner on a grounder to short and narrowly escaped a walk-off home run when Cody Bellinger’s deep blast to right was caught at the warning track by Josh Reddick. This game is headed to extra innings.

Photo

Photo

Top 10th: Back-to-back homers give Astros a lead.

Houston badly needed its best hitters to start delivering, and Jose Altuve and Carlos Correa did that in a big way by starting the 10th inning with back-to-back home runs to give the Astros a 5-3 lead.

The Dodgers ran out of top-shelf relievers, thanks to the aggressiveness of Dave Roberts in trying to protect a narrow lead earlier in the game, so Josh Fields came in for the 10th. Roberts’s aggressiveness had paid off throughout the postseason, but it backfired in Game 2, with Fields giving up the two home runs, and a double to Yulieski Gurriel, before being replaced by Tony Cingrani. Cingrani made quick work of the Astros, allowing just an intentional walk. Houston is now three outs away from victory.

Waldstein: That was Altuve’s sixth postseason home run. Not too shabby. And Carlos Correa follows it up with another blast, the third by the Astros in the last two innings. Correa with an epic bat flip, too. This game, and the series, has pivoted in a hurry, and Dodger Stadium is very quiet.

Photo

Bottom 10th: Dodgers storm back to tie game.

The Astros went ahead 5-3 in the top of the 10th, and sent their closer, Ken Giles, out for a second inning in hopes of finishing off the victory. The Dodgers had other plans. Yasiel Puig led off the inning with a home run, and after Giles struck out two batters, Los Angeles tied things up on a walk to Logan Forsythe and a single by Kike Hernandez. Chris Devenski relieved Giles, and with the winning run at second base, he got Chris Taylor to fly out to center to end the inning.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Waldstein: I have been at some great World Series games, and this one now joins the list. Leads have been erased, home runs all over the place, blown saves, classic bat flips, and to top it all off, the second base umpire, Laz Diaz, gets hit in the upper leg with a pickoff attempt. Had it not hit him, Kike Hernandez certainly would have been on third base, and that might have changed how Dvensky would have pitched to Taylor.

When Forsythe slid home for the tying run, the upper decks of Dodger Stadium were swaying slightly. I remember that from Shea Stadium in 1999 and 2000. A bit unsettling.

Photo

Top 11th: Springer goes deep to put Astros on top.

Brandon McCarthy was not on the N.L.C.S. roster for the Dodgers, but he was added as an extra arm for the World Series. Because the team was officially out of relievers, he was on the mound to try to keep Los Angeles in the game in the 11th. Cameron Maybin led off the inning with a single and stole second before George Springer, who had been ice-cold coming into the game, hit a monster blast to right-center that once again put the Astros on top. McCarthy ended the damage there, getting three quick outs, but the Dodgers now have three outs to stay alive in what has become a wild game.

Bottom 11th: One more home run, but not enough for Dodgers.

Chris Devenski was back out for a second inning of work and he started things off by getting Corey Seager to line out to center. That brought up Justin Turner, and the postseason hero for the Dodgers hit a liner that looked like it might sneak through the infield before Alex Bregman ranged to his left and was able to snare it for the second out. That brought up Charlie Culberson, and the last man on the Dodgers’ bench hit a two-out solo homer to center to narrow Houston’s lead to one run, but that was as close as Los Angeles would get, as Yasiel Puig struck out to end the game.