Fred Claire has the same problem you do.

“I just have trouble accepting that Houston is in the American League,” said Claire, the Dodgers’ general manager in 1988.

Nostalgists were pumped for a Dodgers-Yankees series. But this is fine. The Dodgers and Astros were opposites in the 80s who didn’t attract. Their conflict couldn’t be resolved in a World Series until Houston shifted to the AL in 2013.

The Dodgers and Cincinnati’s Big Red Machine won the old NL West every year in the 70s, with the two most glamorous rosters in baseball.

Related Articles Dodgers’ Chris Taylor found perfect place to take big swing on himself

Dodgers ‘very optimistic’ Corey Seager will return from back injury to play in World Series

Updated Dodgers World Series roster and player profiles

Dodgers 2017 World Series, postseason results, recaps, box scores

Play It Forward Oct. 23-29: Dodgers, Astros know how to turn up the heat But in 1980, the Astros joined in, uninvited, with peach-melba jerseys and a plastic-bat offense. They had just lured Nolan Ryan back home, from Anaheim. Their baseball cards weren’t worth much, but they were a problem.

“You’d go to the Astrodome and you’d be asking, ‘When are they going to turn on all the lights?’’’ said Rick Monday, now the Dodgers’ radio analyst. “They had Ryan, and they had Joe Niekro with his knuckleball. It was dark and tough.”

“It was a great place to pitch,” said Mike Scott, who won the Cy Young Award for Houston in 1986. “And it got loud for big games. One side would yell ‘Houston!’ and the other side would yell ‘Astros!’ Personally I loved it.”

The 1980 Astros hit 26 home runs at home. The opposition hit 22. The Dodgers’ longtime nucleus was still there, but seven of the eight position starters were over 30.

Still, Dodgers fans considered the Astros more impudent than dangerous.

“It never got personal,” Monday said. “Except with Joaquin Andujar. He’d strike you out and then blow on his finger like he’d fired a gun. Dusty Baker got on the top step and yelled, ‘Next time you do that I’m going to knock the spit out of your mouth!’

“Then he noticed we had all our heads down, laughing. Dusty smiled and said, ‘Yeah, that was pretty lame.’’’

Houston came into Dodger Stadium with a three-game lead, three games left. Claire, then the publicity director, asked the groundskeeper to find the bunting that goes up in postseasons.

“A player who had just come to us said, ‘Fred, you act like you really think we’ll win,’’’ Claire said. “I was furious. Winning is what we did.”

They didn’t, but it became one of the most riotous regular-season weekends in ballpark history.

Joe Ferguson’s 10th-inning homer won Friday night’s game, as a 19-year-old named Fernando Valenzuela took care of the last two innings. Jerry Reuss went nine and won 2-1 the next day.

On Sunday, third baseman Enos Cabell booted a grounder in the eighth. Ron Cey launched a go-ahead homer. Don Sutton came in to get the 27th out. The press box shook with noise. Game No. 163 was necessary on Monday.

The Dodgers could have used Valenzuela, who would be America’s darling the very next season. They chose Dave Goltz, their free agent right-hander. Niekro beat the Dodgers, 7-1, and Houston moved on.

“It wasn’t Goltz,” Monday said. “We had some misplays in the first inning and gave up two runs, and then they got two more and it was over.”

The Dodgers camped at Vero Beach six months later. Lasorda had written each of them a letter, challenging them to push hard. They already knew transition was coming.

But a strike halted play for 48 midseason days. L.A. won the first half, Houston the second. They met in a best-of-5 Division Series although Cincinnati had a better overall record than either.

Houston won the first two at home. “It was not a good time to come here and read a paper or turn on the TV,” Monday said.

Cabell lived in L.A. and joined Monday and Reuss on the way to the park. On the way to Game 3 he told them it would be over soon.

But the Dodgers won, 6-1, behind Burt Hooton.

“He was a little quieter the next day,” Monday said.

The Dodgers won, 2-1, with Valenzuela.

“Before Game 5 he called and said his wife would take him to the park,” Monday said.

A walk, an error and singles by Monday, Mike Scioscia and Bill Russell allowed Reuss to beat Ryan, 4-0.

Then the Dodgers trailed Montreal 2-1 in the LCS and the Yankees 2-0 in the World Series and won both.

Houston started strong in ‘86. “They’re in first place but they’re just renting it,” Lasorda claimed. The fans never forgot, and the Astros won, before they lost a bitter, six-game NLCS to the Mets.

Now the Dodgers and Astros are together again, just a little too close to be neighborly.