For the 39th time in World Series history, we've made it to Game 7. Thirty-nine Game 7s might sound like a whole lot, but this is the 113th World Series ever played: just over one-third of those Fall Classics made it this far.

We've had quite a few lately, as 2011, 2014, and 2016 all went seven games. Before that, though, the most recent ones had been 2002 and 2001, and there were just two seven-game World Series in the 90s, so baseball can go through slower periods that are missing Game 7s, too. Let's enjoy each Game 7 when we get the chance to, because who knows when the next 10-year drought will begin.

The Astros had a chance to win their first World Series championship in franchise history -- a history that dates back to 1962 when they were, briefly, the Houston Colt .45's -- but even without a lengthy Rich Hill start, the Dodgers were able to prevent that and force a Game 7.

Say Hey, Baseball Listen, we know it’s tough to catch up on everything happening in the baseball world each morning. Trying to find all of it while on your way to work or sitting at your desk just isn’t easy. It’s OK, though. Subscribe to our daily MLB newsletter and let us do the heavy lifting for you each morning to find the things you need to see.

Now, no matter what, this is the end. The Astros will win their first-ever championship, or the Dodgers will end their near 30-year championship drought, as their last World Series appearance and victory came back when Orel Hersisher, who last pitched in 2000, was the same age Clayton Kershaw is now.

It will be Yu Darvish — who was knocked out of Game 3 in Houston so early it marked the shortest start of his career — taking on Lance McCullers, who had an up-and-down 2017 and has seen that continue in the postseason. When he's been on, though, he looks like no one can stop him.

This game is what the Dodgers acquired Darvish for, so they didn't have to run Clayton Kershaw out there on short rest again. As for McCullers, the Astros have to hope the curveball-centric right-hander is having one of his up nights. He came up huge in the ALCS, and pitched well in his lone World Series start until the bullpen failed to strand either of his bequeathed baserunners.

Either team can win this game. They're equally matched in many ways, and that's even more the case here before Game 7, where the Dodgers' bullpen is better but just a little bit more fatigued after Game 6, and Darvish is the better starter unless he's not quite right like happened in Game 3. In about 10 hours from this writing, there won't be anymore guessing or predicting. It'll just be Game 7, and then that will be that for 2017.