Tuesday marks the Dodgers’ 19th appearance ever in a World Series. Only two franchises – the Giants and the Yankees – have appeared in more. The Dodgers’ 1988 championship took on mythic proportions during the ensuing drought, but the franchise has been here before. A lot.

Here’s a look back at the first 18:

1916: The first and so far only World Series meeting between the Dodgers and Red Sox. Brooklyn, then known as the Robins, lost in five games. In Game 2, Brooklyn starter Sherry Smith surrendered an RBI single in the 14th inning of a 1-1 game. He was outdone by his Boston counterpart, a 21-year-old lefty who also pitched a 14-inning complete game: Babe Ruth.

1920: The Cleveland Indians have won just two World Series in their history; this one came at the Dodgers’ expense. The unusual best-of-9 series was over in seven games, largely because the Dodgers scored just eight runs. Sherry Smith pitched another complete game (Game 6) only to lose 1-0.

1941: The 101-win Yankees prevailed over the 100-win Dodgers in five games, thanks in part to an all-time mishap that sank the Dodgers in Game 4: a dropped third strike that would have ended the game. Given new life, the Yankees rallied from a 4-3 deficit to win 7-4, then closed out the series the following day. Dodger catcher Mickey Owen became one of baseball’s enduring scapegoats.

Video: Dodgers vs. Astros preview

1947: An all-New York thriller, capped by a 5-2 Yankee victory in Game 7 that saw the Dodgers surrender a 2-0 lead. Jackie Robinson and Pee Wee Reese were the Dodgers’ best players, but Game 4 produced some unexpected heroics. Pinch runner Al Gionfriddo stole second base with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning, then scored on a game-winning, two-run double by pinch hitter Cookie Lavagetto – the Dodgers’ only hit of the game.

1949: The Yankees needed five games to win another inter-borough clash. Don Newcombe surrendered a ninth-inning home run to Tommy Henrich in Game 1, a 1-0 Brooklyn loss. Preacher Roe got revenge by pitching a shutout in Game 2, a 1-0 Brooklyn win. The Yankees never trailed the rest of the series.

1952: The Yankees entered the series as the three-time defending champions; their seven-game win cemented the Dodgers’ reputation as also-rans in their own city. Carl Erskine pitched an 11-inning complete game in Game 5 to give Brooklyn a 3-2 series lead, but the Yankees won games 6 and 7 at Ebbets Field.

1953: Eleven Hall of Famers participated in a now-familiar Yankees-Dodgers rematch. The six-game series ended on an RBI single by Billy Martin in the ninth inning of a 3-3 game. The disappointing result cost Brooklyn manager Chuck Dressen his job.

1955: Walter Alston’s second season as manager ended with the Dodgers’ first championship, finally dethroning the Yankees. The regular season was famous for Sandy Koufax taking Tommy Lasorda’s roster spot, but neither appeared in the Series. The unlikely hero: Sandy Amoros, who made a spectacular catch in left field to preserve Johnny Podres’ Game 7 shutout.

1956: The sixth Yankees-Dodgers clash in a 10-year span marked the final World Series played in Brooklyn. The Dodgers scored 19 runs in Games 1-2 and only six runs in Games 3-7 – including Don Larsen’s perfect game in Game 5. Brooklyn’s last hurrah came in Game 6, when Jackie Robinson singled home Jim Gilliam in the 10th inning to win, 1-0.

1959: In their second season in Los Angeles, the Dodgers beat the Chicago White Sox in six games to capture the franchise’s second championship. The Coliseum hosted Games 3-5, the first World Series games played on the West Coast. Dodgers pitcher Larry Sherry went 4-0 as a reliever to win the series MVP award.

1963: Sandy Koufax, Don Drysdale and Johnny Podres recorded all but two of the outs in a lopsided four-game sweep of the Yankees. Frank Howard’s home run to the upper deck of Dodger Stadium in Game 4 punctuated an otherwise low-scoring series. The Yankees mustered just four runs, and Koufax was named MVP.

1965: The series that burnished the legend of Sandy Koufax. Game 1 fell on the Jewish holiday of Yom Kippur, so Koufax pitched Games 2, 5 and 7 against the Minnesota Twins. He tossed a shutout in each of the final two games, each on short rest, and was again chosen series MVP.

1966: Nothing to see here. The Dodgers scored two runs the entire series and the Baltimore Orioles never trailed en route to a four-game sweep. Sandy Koufax, Jim Gilliam, Tommy Davis and Maury Wills either retired or were traded after the series, forcing an organizational rebuild.

1974: Walter Alston’s final World Series as the Dodgers’ manager. His club won 102 games in the regular season but couldn’t come through in the clutch against the two-time defending champion Oakland A’s. Four of the five games were decided by a single run, and the Dodgers went 3 for 34 with runners in scoring position.

1977: The first of three Dodgers-Yankees series in a five-year span. Facing elimination in Game 5, the Dodgers won, 10-4, to send the series back to New York. In Game 6, MVP Reggie Jackson hit three home runs in an 8-4 win, the lasting memory from Tommy Lasorda’s first World Series as manager.

1978: The Dodgers beat the Yankees in Games 1 and 2 at home, only to lose the next four. Rookie pitcher Bob Welch struck out Reggie Jackson to end Game 2, only to lose Game 4 in the 10th inning and surrender a crushing homer to Jackson in Game 6. Don Sutton, a homegrown star and a future Hall of Famer, went 0-2 in his final postseason with the Dodgers.

1981: Revenge is a dish best served shaken. A pair of earthquakes off the coast of Santa Monica preceded the Dodgers’ 5-4 win over the Yankees in Game 3, the first of four straight victories. Ron Cey, Steve Yeager and Pedro Guerrero shared MVP honors.

1988: Kirk Gibson’s fist-pumping, game-winning home run against A’s closer Dennis Eckersley in Game 1 is the lasting image, but it took five games – and two outstanding starts by Orel Hershiser – for the Dodgers to win their sixth championship. Oakland returned to the World Series the following year; the Dodgers waited a generation.