—-

Want exclusive sports news, highlights and analysis from a rotating cast of New York Times journalists, delivered to your inbox once a week? Click here to receive our weekly Sports newsletter.

—-

Here’s how the Astros beat the Dodgers in Game 3, inning by inning:

Photo

Top 1st: McCullers gets three quick outs.

Game 3 began at 8:21 p.m. Eastern with Lance McCullers of the Astros throwing a 95 mile-per-hour fastball low and outside for ball one to Chris Taylor of the Dodgers. McCullers eventually got Taylor to pop out to second and retired Corey Seager when Jose Altuve made a great diving play in shallow-right to knock the ball down before throwing Seager out at first. The inning ended with Justin Turner flying out to deep center.

Waldstein: Yu Darvish takes the mound in the bottom of the first for the Dodgers as the first Japanese starting pitcher in the World Series in 10 years. The last one was Daisuke Matsuzaka for the Boston Red Sox in their four-game sweep of the Colorado Rockies in 2007. Matsuzaka also started Game 3.

Darvish has plenty of experience pitching at Minute Maid Park from his days with the Texas Rangers. He comes into the game with a 4-1 record and a 2.16 earned run average, so the Dodgers are pinning a lot of their hopes on him replicating that success here.

Bottom 1st: Darvish gets out of jam.

George Springer worked a 3-1 count against Yu Darvish and then pounced on a fastball in the zone, hitting a hard liner to center for a double. Alex Bregman made Darvish work, fouling off five pitches in an eight-pitch at-bat, but ultimately grounded out to third, which kept Springer at second. Jose Altuve flew out to deep center, which sent Springer to third, but Darvish got ahead in the count and Carlos Correa grounded out to short to end the inning.

Top 2nd: Dodgers make some noise, but no runs.

Lance McCullers threw half of his 12 pitches in the inning to one batter, but worked around a single to keep the game scoreless. He needed just three pitches to strike out Cody Bellinger, as the rookie infielder almost fell down as he swung wildly at a knuckle-curve. One pitch to Yasiel Puig and McCullers had a second out on a grounder to second, but Logan Forsythe got the Dodgers’ first hit on a single to right. Forsythe was able to steal second as Austin Barnes worked a six-pitch at-bat, but the half-inning ended when Barnes grounded out to third.

Photo

Bottom 2nd: Astros jump all over Darvish and score 4 runs.

Yu Darvish struggled to put pitches where he wanted them and that led to a great inning for struggling Astros batters. Only six outs into the game, Dave Roberts had seen enough and removed his No. 3 starter with the Dodgers already down 4-0.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yulieski Gurriel, who was 1 for 7 in Games 1 and 2, led things off by unloading on a fastball for a solo home run. Josh Reddick, whose bat had been almost entirely silent, doubled to left for his first extra-base hit of the postseason. Evan Gattis walked and Marwin Gonzalez, who had been in a horrible funk leading up to his game-tying home run in Game 2, singled off the wall in left, scoring Reddick.

With runners on first and second with no outs, Brian McCann, who was hitless in the first two games of the series, looped a ball into right-center that brought home Gattis and sent Gonzalez to third.

Photo

Darvish finally got his first out when George Springer, the sixth batter of the half-inning, lined out to second, but Alex Bregman hit a fly ball deep enough to center to give Gonzalez enough time to tag up and score, making the score 4-0.

Jose Altuve doubled to left, sending McCann over to third, and that brought out Roberts, who replaced Darvish with Kenta Maeda. Maeda needed just two pitches to end the inning, getting Carlos Correa to fly out to right.

Darvish’s final line was one and two-thirds innings, six hits and four runs. He walked one and had no strikeouts in the shortest start of his career.

Waldstein: Darvish did not have it tonight. Even the outs were on balls that were hit hard. Gurriel started it by ripping a line-drive home run into the left field bleachers, which can be home to some of the cheapest home runs in baseball. Not to say that it was cheap, because he hammered the ball. But the distance is 315 feet, only 5 feet deeper than Fenway Park in Boston. But the wall here is about half the height of the 37-foot Green Monster, so it is one of the most tantalizing targets in baseball for a right-handed pull hitter, as Gurriel showed. It was the sixth home run hit in the last four innings of this World Series, going back to the extra innings of Game 2.

Photo

Top 3rd: Dodgers get one back.

Given a fairly sizable lead, Lance McCullers walked the bases loaded to start the third, but managed to get out of the half-inning having only allowed one run. It was a rough start, as he engaged in a battle with Joc Pederson. The boom-or-bust hitter fought off several good pitches in what proved to be a nine-pitch walk. Undoubtedly frustrated by putting Pederson on base, McCullers responded with walks to Kike Hernandez and Chris Taylor. He got some help when his defense turned a double-play on a grounder from Corey Seager, and ended the inning by getting Justin Turner to ground out to short. The inning could’ve gone far worse for McCullers, who should be happy with a 4-1 score.

Waldstein: You want to make a pitching coach crazy? Get handed a 4-0 lead and then go to the mound and walk the No. 8, No. 9 and No. 1 hitters to load the bases with nobody out. That’s what Lance McCullers, Jr. just did. But thanks to some terrific defense, including by McCullers, himself, the Astros avoided big damage. The big play was getting Corey Seager to ground into a double play that required some exceptional synchronized movement and pinpoint throws from the Astros to complete. First baseman Yuli Gurriel threw a strike off the wrong foot to Carlos Correa coming across the second base bag and he, while in stride, delivered the ball to a moving target in McCullers covering first. That kind of cohesion begins in spring training.

Photo

Bottom 3rd: Maeda cools down Astros’ batters.

After a pair of lengthy half-innings for both teams, Kenta Maeda made quick work of the Astros in the third. He started by getting a pair of matching pop-outs to third from Yulieski Gurriel and Josh Reddick. A walk to Evan Gattis was a mild speed bump, but Maeda finished things off by getting Marwin Gonzalez to ground out to first to end the inning.

Photo

Top 4th: Puig’s gamble backfires.

A bang-bang play went Houston’s way, sending the Dodgers down in order. With one out, Yasiel Puig hit a grounder down the third-base line that Alex Bregman could not quite reach. The ball skipped into foul territory, but Puig took some time before realizing he should round first and Carlos Correa was able to corral the ball and throw him out at second. Stoked to have two outs despite the hard hit by Puig, Lance McCullers ended things by getting Logan Forsythe to fly out to right.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Waldstein: Yasiel Puig has been caught admiring balls before, but this time he suffered from putting his head down and hustling to first base. After hitting a sharp bouncer down the third base line, Puig ran so hard that he did not see the ball had skipped past third baseman Alex Bregman. Puig overran first, slowed down and only then realized he should have been headed to second. By the time he restarted and slid into second, the ball was in Jose Altuve’s glove and Puig was tagged out.

Bottom 4th: Maeda’s relief appearance gives Dodgers hope.

Kenta Maeda has done a terrific job of settling things down after Yu Darvish’s disastrous start. Brian McCann led off fourth against him by looping a ball just out of Corey Seager’s reach in shallow left field for a single. But Maeda was unfazed and went on to strike out George Springer on four pitches and Alex Bregman on five. He got out of the inning when Jose Altuve grounded out to short.

Maeda is up to 38 pitches in two and one-thirds innings of relief as the Dodgers try to get as much as they can from one of the team’s three best relievers.

Photo

Top 5th: McCullers gets out of trouble again.

Lance McCullers worked around some tremendous hustle from Joc Pederson to pitch another scoreless inning, with some help from George Springer. With one out, Pederson hit what looked like a single to center. But the young outfielder ran hard right out of the box and managed to stretch the soft hit into a double. Kike Hernandez sent him to third on a groundout to second, but McCullers got out of the inning when Chris Taylor hit a shallow fly to center that a diving Springer was able to snare for the third out.