Stock markets around the world plunged today after Standard & Poor's cut Greece's credit rating to junk status and downgraded its view of Portugal in the clearest evidence yet that the European sovereign debt crisis is spreading. Italy and Spain are also viewed as vulnerable.

In London, the FTSE 100 index closed down more than 150 at 5603, a fall of 2.6%, and there were big falls in share prices in Athens, New York, Paris and Frankfurt.

Analysts blamed politicians in Germany for dragging their feet over a Greek rescue package worth €45bn. German chancellor Angela Merkel has demanded that Greece come up with a tougher and longer austerity package before the EU ploughs in €30bn and the International Monetary Fund comes up with €15bn. But investors fear the government will be unable to deliver amid opposition from trade unions who have already taken to the streets.

The Greek finance ministry said the downgrade of Greek bonds did not reflect the country's true economic state. "The downgrade does not reflect the true fundamentals of the Greek economy or the progress on the fiscal front," it said.

The country faces a critical date on 19 May when it needs to repay €9bn to foreign and domestic investors, but cannot do so by raising funds on the bond markets because the cost of servicing its short-term debt has rocketed to 14%. That has raised the spectre of Greece becoming insolvent which would have serious repercussions for the future of the euro.

Today Europe's poorest nation, Portugal, became the latest country to be dragged into the crisis as S&P downgraded its credit rating to A-, reflecting its view of "the amplified risks Portugal faces".

Portugal has been widely considered the most likely to suffer if Greece's debt crisis spreads. Its credit default swaps show investors rank its debt as the world's eighth riskiest, worse than Lebanon and Guatemala. Portugal has a higher debt than Greece and the risk-premium on its bonds recently rose to more than double the past year's average. Its finance minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos admitted that there were "contagion risks".

Gary Jenkins, head of fixed income research at Evolution Securities, said: "The longer it takes to get the Greek rescue package together, the worse things will get. Everyone knows that markets hate uncertainty. There is a danger that events could spiral out of control in the absence of decisive action."

Economists believe Greece will need more than the €45bn pledged so far. Erik Nielsen of Goldman Sachs said today that rescuing the Greek economy could require €150bn over the next three years. "I suspect some haggling is now going on between the IMF and the eurozone on how they can share the burden of a bigger programme," he said.

Steven Major, head of fixed income research at HSBC, estimated Greece would need €110bn over the next two years and that "a longer-term plan was in everyone's best interests".

At a meeting of the IMF in Washington at the weekend, finance ministers admitted that €45bn was just the start of what was needed. Greek officials are understood to be pushing for a three-year deal, as the bare minimum. Today, head of the Greek central bank George Provopoulos tried to calm markets by saying spending cuts to achieve "ambitious fiscal targets" was the best option as further increases in tax rates would hurt economic activity which was already slumping.

Greece has been living beyond its means in recent years and its rising level of debt – 115% of GDP – has placed a huge strain on its economy and mean investors are wary of lending more. The country's debt stands at €300bn.

The FTSE's fall today was the worst day's performance since 26 November last year when worries about debt in Dubai gripped investors.

By the time London closed, Wall Street was about 125 points lower, with investors ignoring better than expected US confidence figures as the news of the S&P downgrades filtered through. In France the CAC 40 fell 3.82% while the German Dax ended 2.73% lower.

But UK gilts jumped almost a full point to 115.33 while gold hit two week highs as investors sought safe havens. The euro fell around 1% against the dollar to $1.3264, and 0.1% against the pound to 86.60p.