Jean-Claude Juncker has cancelled tomorrow's meeting of eurozone finance minister. From the Associated Press report:

Jean-Claude Juncker, who is also prime minister of Luxembourg, says the Eurogroup was still missing information from Athens on how it plans to save promised €325 million.

He says he also did not receive assurances from the leaders of the two main Greek parties that they will implement the program even after elections expected for April.

He said Tuesday the ministers will instead have a teleconference Wednesday and meet next Monday

As its Valentine's Day, I'm sure you all have better things to do than read this blog any more.

So here's a summary:

• George Osborne has defended his fiscal plans after Moody's cut the outlook on Britain's AAA rating to negative. The chancellor claimed that the move bolstered his fiscal plans, despite shadow chancellor Ed Balls warning that world leaders are risking a second Great Depression.

• Financial markets shrugged off Moody's decision to downgrade six countries and put the UK, France and Austria on negative outlook. European stock markets were little changed today. Some analysts warned, though, that the UK's credit rating could deteriorate if the economic outlook worsens.

• There was grim economic news for the eurozone. Greece's economy shrank by 7% in the last quarter, on a year-on-year basis, while Portugal contracted by 1.3% over the quarter. Industrial output across the eurozone fell at the end of last year, making a recession appear more likely.

• Greece continued to recover from the weekend's riots. Around 500 people could lose their jobs, while New Democracy leader Antonis Samaras vowed to catch the "scumbags" responsible.

• The Greek cabinet continued to search for spending cuts to meet its obligations in return for a second bailout. However a eurogroup meeting scheduled for Wednesday has been cancelled, in favour of a telephone conference call, as Greece has not yet met its obligations.....

• Mario Monti's government agreed new spending cuts. That includes reducing spending on the F-35 strike fighter, and not supporting Rome's bid for the Olympics in 2020.

Thanks all for reading and commenting, and a special nod of gratitude to those who offered suggestions of how to improve things. Goodnight!

Another gobbet of info from Athens.

The Greek government spokesman Pandelis Kapsis told ANT 1 TV today that the €325m shortfall Greece must find before tomorrow's euro group meeting would be "amassed" from ministerial budgets. But he refused to be drawn on that other hot issue: on how Greece planned to give written committments to foreign lenders that it would stick to the deal.

So that's the problematic paperwork (see 5.05pm) that had delayed tomorrow's meeting....

There's a late breaking rumour coming out of Brussels that tomorrow's eurogroup meeting might be cancelled, because (deep breath) the final paperwork from Greece may not be ready.

According to Reuters, finance minister may just hold a conference call instead....

All should be clear by the morning.

UPDATED UPDATE: Jean-Claude Juncker, head of the eurogroup, has just confirmed that it's a conference call, to discuss the "outstanding issues" surrounding Greece's second bailout.

Juncker explained, in a statement, that Greece has still not provided the written assurances needed. "Further work is needed" between Athens and the Troika, he added.

Great....

The much-awaited cabinet meeting in Greece is continuing, but there's no official news yet. It also appears that the cabinet reshuffle that appeared imminent yesterday has been kicked along the road.

Helena Smith reports from Athens that Lucas Papademos is now unlikely to carry out a broad reshuffle because elections are now almost certain to take place in April, bringing his administration to an end. She explains that:

Rumours had swirled that Papademos, a technocrat banker, would move ahead with a massive streamlining of his 48-member cabinet, appointing other technocrats to key positions. "But it's now felt there simply isn't the time when we have to focus so exclusively on closing the [bailout] deal," said an insider.





There is now exactly five weeks until Greece must repay €14.5bn of maturing debt - money it doesn't have. The government wants to wrap up negotiations over a bond swap deal - which will see the private sector accepting up to 70% losses on the Greek government holdings -- by Friday, sources tell Helena.

Here's some sobering expert comment on Moody's, from Louise Cooper of BGC Partners.

She argues that Britain should be concerned by the decision to cut its outlook to negative, because other AAA ratings have crumbled quickly in this crisis as country's debt positions begin to deteriorate.



The fear is that one downgrade is not the end of it. With so much debt, the risk is that borrowing costs rise as investors and ratings agencies lose the (UK) faith. Italy has been downgraded today to A3, which is seven notches below AAA. The UK has some way to go yet. However downgrades can happen rather quickly - Spain was AAA rated up until September 2010, since then Moody's has downgraded the country six times and it is currently rated at A3.

European stock markets have closed – after a pretty flat session. Despite Moody's decision to cut the UK's outlook to negative, the FTSE 100 ended just 5 points lower at 5899.

Most other European markets were slightly lower, while the Italian FTSE MIB actually gained 0.5%.

Mike McCudden, head of derivatives at Interactive Investor, warned that shares could easily slide if tomorrow's crunch meeting in Brussels (see 4.20pm) is a disappointment:

With the FTSE still eyeing that big 6,000 level, there's no shortage of voices calling the market overvalued right now and with the Greek saga rolling on - tomorrow's Ecofin meeting being the latest landmark here - any surprises, or even just further hesitation, could easily see the bears back out in force.

European officials have been probing Greece's latest austerity plan today, even though the final details are still being debated at a cabinet meeting in Athens right now.

A working party assembled by the eurogroup has been inspecting the plan in Brussels today, ahead of the formal meeting of eurozone's finance ministers tomorrow. They must decide whether Greece has actually met the terms of its second bailout package.

Austrian finance minister Maria Fekter struck an optimistic tone this afternoon, telling reporters:

I am confident that - as far as I know the details - Greece will get more help.

The eurogroup is due to meet at 5pm GMT on Wednesday, so the verdict could come quite late....

Another interesting development from Italy – a defence minister is telling MPs that it has "revised" its commitment to the Lockheed Martin F-35 Joint Strike Fighter.

The move comes as part of a wider review of defence spending. Giampaulo Di Paola added that Italy still has an "important commitment" to the stealth fighter, but the cuts have already raised fears over the F-35's long-term future.

There were rumours last week that Italy would order 30 fewer planes. It was inked in to buy 131. Di Paola will release details of the cutbacks on Wednesday. The decision was apparently taken at the same cabinet meeting where Rome's Olympic ambitions were torched.

Cutting the F-35 order would save Italy money, but could also have a knock-on impact on its own economy. Finmeccanica, the state-owned aerospace firm, has the contract to assemble fighters bought by Italy, the Netherlands and Norway.

The eurozone financial crisis has scuppered Italy's hopes of holding the Olympics.

Mario Monti has ended weeks of uncertainty by refusing to back Rome's efforts to hold the Games in 2020. The technocratic PM told reporters in Rome in the last few minutes that Italy's tough financial position meant it was impossible for him to provide the "financial guarantee" insisted on by the IoC.

Following a cabinet meeting, Monti explained that:

We arrived at the unanimous conclusion that in Italy's current condition the government does not feel able to take on the commitment to offer the guarantee.

Perhaps the Italian government has watched the cost of London's Olympics rise steadily in the run-up to the event, before deciding that the Italian balance sheet is under enough pressure already....

Ireland has been warned to expect further austerity in 2013. The Dublin finance department tweaked its "memorandum of understanding" with its lenders – it now expects to cut "at least €3.5bn" next year (the "at least" is new).

Interesting survey from Poland today – public opposition to joining the euro is now running at 2-1.

CBOS, a polling firm, found that the ongoing eurozone crisis means 60% of people want to retain the zloty. It explained that:



A possible, out-of-control collapse of the euro zone is treated by Poles as a serious threat that could lead to a recession and an economic crisis in the European Union, and in turn even to its disintegration Doubts concerning the common currency project are translating into falling acceptance for introducing the euro in Poland.

According to Reuters, support for the euro peaked within Poland in 2002, and has been sliding since the financial crisis began.

Keeping out of the euro worked well for Poland. The zloty dropped in value once the global downturn began, and this devaluation helped the country return to growth – expanding by around 4% in 2011.

Officially, the Polish government's aim is to join the eurozone at some point, but it has avoided setting a date.

Some disappointing US retail sales data has helped to push the Dow Jones into the red, at the start of trading on Wall Street.

The Dow is 45 points lower at 12825, down around 0.4%, mirroring the losses in Europe (where the FTSE 100 is now down 27 points at 5878).

As Nick Fletcher explains here, US retail sales rose by 0.4%, missing forecasts for a 0.7% rise.

Pensioners have been marching in Athens today in protest at the country's austerity measures.

Hundreds of people took part, bearing banners with slogans including: "Free social health for all", "Medicines and Health public and free", and "For pensioneers there is nothing, money exists only for plutocracy".

Although Greek leaders refused to accept €300m of new pension cuts last week, Greece's elderly have already seen their incomes fall since the financial crisis began. The country's pension funds have already lost an estimated €20bn since 2009.

Amid all the bad news about the dire straits of the Greek economy, the damage wrought by Sunday's riots has dealt a devastating blow for local business. Some 500 people may lose their jobs.

Helena Smith, our correspondent in Greece, reports:



In the trail of devastation left by the young rioters who ran amok as parliament voted Sunday on the controversial EU-IMF sponsored rescue package for debt-stricken Greece, the lives of hundreds of small businessman have also been destroyed.



The Athens Chamber of Commerce announced today that at least 150 shops, including banks and cafes, were vandalized in the mayhem. The vast majority were also looted. Around 45 of the buildings, nine of which were listed as historic edifices, had been damaged beyond repair as a result of fire ignited by protesters throwing molotof cocktails at them. "Most will probably never open again," Panaghiotis Kanellas a spokesman told a local radio station. "Beyond the damage, worth tens of millions of euros, at least 500 jobs are now in question."



Police today confirmed that the rioters – hooded members of anti-establishment and anarchist groups -- had turned the Law School at Athens University, buildings they had occupied earlier in the week, into a "bomb-making factory."



Despite new legislation allowing authorities to arrest those who seek asylum in university buildings – a legacy of the fabled 1973 uprising at the Athens Polytechnic which lead to the fall of military rule – rectors and police had failed to act.



"Their criminal indifference allowed these groups of thugs to turn the law school into the centre of their war operations enabling them to destroy the city," said Dimitris Zafeiriades spokesman for the Democratic Alliance party.

The conservative leader Antonis Samaras, widely tipped to become the country's next prime minister, also spoke out – warning the rioters to expect retribution:

They destroyed the city. They destroyed businesses. They intentionally chose traditional buildings and burned them. These scumbags should be aware that when the time comes I will pull off their hoods.

Although a menace for Greek society for the past two decades, few of the masked protestors have ever been identified, Helena adds.

Spain, Italy and Greece all enjoyed success in the bond markets today – selling debt at higher prices (and thus lower interest rates) than at previous auctions.

Italy did particularly well, selling three year-bonds at average yields of 3.41%, well below last time's 4.83%. The full story is here.

Of course, yields have been lower since the ECB pumped liquidity into the European financial sector last December. Sony Kapoor of the Re-Define think tank argued that deflation fears are driving investors into government bonds, while bond market-maker Gustavo Baratta argued that any yield drop should be celebrated.

@SonyKapoor at least we celebrate the defusing of spiralling yield bombs: pretty disruptive stuff. #Eurocrisis will take much longer to fix — Gustavo Baratta (@gusbaratta) February 14, 2012

European Union leaders have been wooing the political elite in China today, in an attempt to persuade Beijing to help Europe out of its debt crisis.

The EU rolled the big guns out – dispatching European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso and European Council President Herman Van Rompuy to meet with Chinese premier Wen Jiabao.

The trio held a press conference, at which Wen offered China's now-traditional support, but again stopped short of announcing any actual plan. Instead, the Chinese premier said China was prepared to "increase its commitment", explaining:

China is firm in supporting the EU side in dealing with the debt problems. We match our words with our actions. We are willing to conduct close communication and co-operation with the EU side.

It appears that the crucial Greek cabinet meeting has been postponed by an hour, to 4pm local time (2pm GMT).

At the meeting, PM Lucas Papademos must find the missing €325m of budget cuts demanded by the eurozone's finance ministers. The Eurogroup is meeting tomorrow, so Papademos needs agreement today (although how often have we read/written that?....)

Many people have pointed out that Britain has been here before. In 2009 Standard & Poor's cut the UK to negative outlook, only to return it to stable after the General Election.

However, this time it may be different. Here's a few expert views:

Simon Hayes of Barclays Capital:

Two years ago, when S&P had the UK on negative outlook, the question was whether the government could come up with a credible deficit reduction plan. The risk to the rating was therefore largely in the government's own hands. This time the situation is more precarious. A credible plan is

in place, and the question now is over the strength of the economy.

Jane Foley of Rabobank:

This morning's news has not caused the same degree of market reaction as in 2009....This is largely because the US and France have already lost their AAA S&P rating. That said the UK government will be hoping that the austerity already in the pipeline will prove to be sufficient to stave off a downgrade and that the threat to growth stemming from the Eurozone will improve this year.

David Miller, partner at Cheviot Asset Management:

Investors are getting use to living with downgrades now, and the latest decision by Moody's won't change their views of the UK. It's a story rather than a Market Mover.

Further proof that the City isn't spooked by Moody's downgrade – the FTSE 100 just nudged into positive territory (plus 6 points at 5912).

Analysts and economists have broadly agreed that Moody's actions were largely 'priced-in', although the UK warning was the most surprising element.

Today's poor eurozone industrial production data (see 10.38am) shows how many of Europe's weaker peripheral nations have suffered since the financial crisis began.

As this graph from Eurostat shows, European industry now produces about as much as it did in 2005 (and again in late 2008, on the way down), and is still 11% lower than its peak level.

Industrial output in Greece is 28.4% below the 2005 level, Portugal is down 13.6%, Spain 18.3%, while the UK has declined by 11.7%. German economic output, though, is 8.8% higher than in 2005.

Tim Ohlenburg, senior economist at the Centre for Economics and Business Research, commented:

These figures offer an important perspective on the on-going sovereign debt crisis: the Eurozone has failed to recover and is now backtracking rather than making progress. The ECB has been able to plaster over the cracks of strained monetary union. Recession will make this unenviable task harder.

More proof that the eurozone economy is in trouble and heading into recession. Industrial production across the region tumbled in December 2011, down 1.1% compared with November.

The fall was particularly steep in Germany, Europe's industrial powerhouse, where output plunged by 2.7% during the month.

Howard Archer, chief European economist at IHS Global Insight, commented:

The December Eurozone industrial production confirm that the manufacturing sector suffered a torrid fourth quarter of 2011 and contributed significantly to probable appreciable Eurozone GDP contraction (we estimate it at 0.4% quarter-on-quarter).

But despite the malaise, German investor sentiment has risen more than expected this month. The closely watched ZEW survey hit its highest level since April as economists and investors felt more optimistic about the German economy.

According to ZEW (a think tank), the wider picture is that the euro crisis looks "less scary than three months ago". The data was collected, though, before violence erupted in parts of Athens over the weekend.

Here's a question that should interest regular readers – how can we cover the euro crisis better?

With Moody's ratings changes dominating the political and economic agenda today, the Guardian News Desk would like to know how we can improve our coverage.

My colleague Claire Phipps blogs here:

Here we'll be asking what readers want from our coverage – does the world of credit rating agencies and "negative outlooks" need more explanation? What would you like our business and politics reporters to be looking into?

Obviously we do respond to your daily feedback and criticism through the reader comments (many mistakes and typos have been caught Below The Line). But this is another good chance to influence things, so do join in.

Grim economic news from Portugal, hard on the heels of Greece (see 10.03am).

The Portuguese economy shrank by 1.3% in the last three months of 2011, compared with the previous quarter, as the austerity measures demanded by its international lenders took hold.

For 2011 as a whole, Portugal shrank by 1.5% during 2011, its National Statistics Institute reported. It already expects to contract by around 3% this year, as tax hikes and spending cuts kick in.

New data from Greece shows the desperate state of Greek's economy – its GDP plunged by 7% in the fourth quarter of 2011, on a year-on-year basis.

The latest GDP data show that Greece's economic decline accelerated in the last three months of the year.

Here's a breakdown of Greece's GDP over the last 12 months:

Q1 2011: -8.0% year-on-year

Q2 2011: -7.3% y/y

Q3 2011: -5.0% y/y

Q4 2011: -7.0% y/y

News from Athens – the Greek cabinet are planning to meet at 1pm GMT (3pm local time) to discuss the country's economic crisis.

PM Lucas Papademos's offices said that the cabinet will discuss what further actions need to be taken to qualify for a second international bailout. Time is ticking – the Eurogroup wants a decision by its meeting on Wednesday.

Being downgraded by Moody's didn't prevent Spain selling almost €5.5bn of debt, at cheaper costs than previously.

Spain just reported that it sold €2.9bn of 12-month loans at an average yield (effectively the interest rate) of 1.899%, down from 2.049% previously. It also auctioned €2.5bn at yields of 2.3%.

UK inflation data is just in, showing a drop in the rising cost of living.

The Consumer Prices Index came in at 3.6% in January, down from 4.2% in December.

The Retail Prices Index fell to 3.9%, from 4.8%.

Both measures fell because the rise in VAT, to 20%, is now falling out of the calculations. Clothing and footware, transport and food prices all fell on a month-on-month basis.

Our colleague Andrew Sparrow is tracking all the political fallout to the Moody's announcement on his Politics Live blog.

He's pulled together some of the immediate reaction from Twitter

It includes a crucial point from Allister Heath, editor of City A.M:

Why does Osborne say he "won't waver when dealing with [UK's] debts"? He means deficit, not debt, which is still exploding. Big difference.

Being lowered to negative outlook means there is roughly a one in three chance that Britain will lose its AAA rating with Moody's.

Britain's gilts have not fallen in value this morning, though. The yield (effectively the interest rate) on 10-year UK bonds remains virtually flat this morning at 2.13%.

According to Linda Yueh of Bloomberg, just eight countries can boast a AAA rating with stable outlook:

Now only 8 AAA with stable outlook (-UK): Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland from S&P Moody's Fitch — Linda Yueh (@lindayueh) February 14, 2012

Here's the details of the six Eurozone countries who were downgraded by Moody's last night (rather than just seeing their outlook cut):

Italy: A one-notch downgrade to A3 from A2, + negative outlook

Malta: A one-notch downgrade to A3 from A2, + negative outlook

Portugal: A one-notch downgrade to Ba3 from Ba2, + negative outlook

Slovakia: A one-notch downgrade to A2 from A1, + negative outlook

Slovenia: A one-notch downgrade to A2 from A1, + negative outlook

Spain: A two-notch downgrade to A3 from A1, + negative outlook

Europe's financial markets have opened a little lower this morning following Moody's actions, but there's no sign of panic.

The FTSE 100 is 16 points lower at 5889, with banking shares losing around 0.5%.

While the Spanish market is down around 0.6%, The Italian FTSE MIB is actually higher despite Italy being downgraded last night by Moody's.

Chris Weston of IG Index said Moody's was telling the City what it already knew: "that there are clear fiscal worries out there".

Clearly this was not a game changer but comes at a time when risk assets are in reflection mode after a strong run and the timeline to March 20 [when Greece must repay €14.5bn remains tight.

Humphrys asks if any more knighthoods will be taken away. Osborne repeats we need to end the anti-business rhetoric.

We've got to celebrate business and business success in this country, we want our economy to grow, dealing with our debts is an important part of creating confidence in Britain, we are not going to waiver from dealing with this country's debts.

And that's the end of the Today interview.

Humphrys: you have collectively rattled business hugely. The message you are delivering to big business is you don't like them very much, you don't trust them very much. Osborne replies the treatment of the banking system has been different to the rest of business.

I draw a distinction with the banking system, I've got a responsiblity to the people that we don't have to bail out banks as they fail. the fundamental part of the free market is you get rewards for success but there shouldn't be rewards for failure. I banks fail they should go bust.



Humphrys reminds Osborne that Sir Martin Sorrell has accused the government of moral capitalism and banker bashing. Osborne replies that Britain rewards success:

If you are successful in Britain we are welcoming to you, our country is open to investment, open to business. What we will not accept is what happened over the last decade which is certain institutions got far too overindebted and when they failed the tax payer had to step in.



Humphrys mentions the Royal Bank of Scotland and Osborne says RBS was a "symbol of what had gone wrong" in Britain.

Osborne replies to a question about the removal of Fred Goodwin's knighthood, saying:

That was a decision of an independent committee of civil servants. The point is in this country we should not have rewards for failure we should have rewards for success. There is a bit of a culture that has developed in the media that is anti-business. we draw a distinction between sorting out the banking sector and rewarding success and encouraging business.

George Osborne is on the Today programme now to discuss Moody's decision to lower the UK's credit outlook to negative.

John Humphrys is asking the questions. First up: Did Osborne have a bad night, did he lose sleep over the move?

The chancellor replies:

When I heard yesteday, just before it was made public, for me it was a reality check that Britain has to deal with its debts and here is yet another organisation warning Britain that if we spend or borrow too much we are going to lose our credit rating and that will lead to a loss of investor confidence in our economy. Britain doesn't have an easy route out of the economic problems, it's got to confront them and that's what I intend to do.

But aren't your fiscal cuts damaging growth, asks Humphrys.

The weaker growth prospects have been a challenge... the idea that I have abandoned growth is nonsense. But if you don't have confidence in a coutry's ability to pay its debts you get negative growth, less jobs and no prospect of recovery.

Osborne adds that Moody's is warning that Britain would be downgraded if there was a reduced commitment to dealing with the debts and if there was any more discretionary borrowing (see 8.04am for more on this)

Moody's statement does offer George Osborne some comfort. It says that a "reduced political commitment to fiscal consolidation" could actually lead to Britain being downgrade from AAA.

From las night's statement, Moody's says the UK could be downgraded if it suffers:

a combination of significantly slower economic growth over a multi-year time horizon -- perhaps due to persistent private-sector deleveraging and very weak growth in Europe -- and reduced political commitment to fiscal consolidation, including discretionary fiscal loosening or a failure to respond to a deteriorating fiscal outlook;

Two other possible triggers for a downgrade are "a sharp rise in debt-refinancing costs" and "renewed problems in the banking sector".

Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, hit the airwaves as dawn broke over the UK, insisting that George Osborne should change course.

Balls told the Radio 4 Today Programme that the Treasury must make growth a bigger priority. Otherwise, we risk sliding ino a second Great Depression, with deflation and mass unemployment.

Here's the key quote from Balls:

Even the rating agencies now recognise that austerity alone is self-defeating. The world is making 1930's mistakes – and rating agencies are partly responsible. Today is the first evidence that even the rating agencies are waking up to this.

Osborne will get his chance to rebut Balls in a few minutes – he's due on the Today programme at 8.10am.

Moody's warning is the headline news on a busy day for economic data – including the latest UK inflation reading. There are also some interesting government bond sales scheduled.

Here's today's agenda:

• UK inflation (CPI and RPI) - 9.30am GMT

• Portuguese GDP for Q4 2011 10am GMT / 11am CET

• Greek GDP for Q4 2011 10am GMT / 11am CET

• German ZEW economic sentiment survey -10am GMT / 11am CET

• Eurozone industrial production - 10am GMT / 11am CET

• US Treasury secretary Tim Geithner testifies to the Senate Finance Committee - 3pm GMT / 10am EST

Bond auctions:

• Italy auctioning €6bn of debt,

• Greece auctioning three-month bonds

• Spain auctioning 12 and 18-month bonds

Moody's said its rating changes were based on each country's susceptibility to the "growing financial and economic risks" created by the eurozone debt crisis.

The main drivers were:

• The uncertainty over (i) the euro area's prospects for institutional reform of its fiscal and economic framework and (ii) the resources that will be made available to deal with the crisis.

• Europe's increasingly weak macroeconomic prospects, which threaten the implementation of domestic austerity programmes and the structural reforms that are needed to promote competitiveness.

• impact that Moody's believes these factors will continue to have on market confidence, which is likely to remain fragile, with a high potential for further shocks to funding conditions for stressed sovereigns and banks.

You can see the full statement here.

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the European financial crisis.

Credit rating agency Moody's has cut its rating on six European countries -- Italy, Spain, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Malta. It put a further three on negative watch – France, Austria and the UK, in a threat to Britain's AAA rating.

The move, which came a few hours ago, underlines the depth of Europe's debt crisis.

We'll be tracking all the reaction and analysis to Moody's move today, as well as watching events across Europe – as Greece's future within the eurozone hangs in the balance. As usual, you can have your say in the comments below – or get in touch via Twitter.