LONDON (MarketWatch) — Greece got the all-clear on its statistical methods Monday, but only after the European Union’s statistical agency revised to 15.4% of gross domestic product its estimate of the nation’s 2009 fiscal deficit — higher by nearly two full percentage points.

An upward revision from a previous 13.6% estimate had been widely anticipated after the European Commission last spring flagged Greece’s statistics agency for a range of questionable practices.

The Greek finance ministry, in turn, lifted its estimate of the 2010 deficit to 9.4% of GDP from an earlier forecast of 7.9%, but it said the year-to-year reduction of six percentage points in the deficit was unprecedented and was larger than planned.

“The latest upward revisions to the Greek budget deficit figures emphasize the enormous task that Greece faces to get its public finances back on an even keel,” said Ben May, European economist at Capital Economics.

Still, the ministry said it remained on track to meet its target of cutting the deficit to 3% of GDP by 2014. The government’s scheduled to submit its latest budget plan to parliament on Thursday.

Greece’s debt levels were also revised higher, with Eurostat, the EU statistical agency, boosting its estimate of 2009 public debt to 127% of GDP from an earlier estimate of 115%. Greece expects the debt ratio to hit 144% of GDP for 2010.

In order to meet the deficit target of 7.6% of GDP required under its European Union-International Monetary Fund rescue package, Greece will likely need to announce further budget-cutting measures worth around 4.5 billion euros, or about 2% of GDP, in its 2011 budget, May said.

Debt restructuring in the cards?

“These new measures should ensure that the government receives its third tranche of funds in late November or early December, but they will prolong the recession,” he said. “Given this, we still think that some kind of debt restructuring is almost inevitable at some point in the future.”

Christoph Weill, economist at Commerzbank in Frankfurt, said pressure on Greece from EU headquarters in Brussels to step up its consolidation efforts will be difficult to meet.

“The Greek government has already cut its spending considerably,” Weill said. “Further reductions are almost impossible from a political vantage point. Additional tax hikes would probably be counterproductive as well, as they would prolong the recession and thus reduce the tax base.”

Meanwhile, the cost of protecting Greece’s debt against the threat of default through credit default swaps rose on Monday.

The spread on five-year Greek CDS widened 20 basis points to 8.8 percentage points, according to data provider Markit. That means it would cost $880,000 annually to insure $10 million of Greek debt against default for five years, up from $860,000 on Friday.

Eurostat expressed concerns about the treatment of surplus social security funds, the classification of some public entities and the impact of the use of controversial off-market swaps on Greece’s public-finance statistics.