KINGSTOWN, St Vincent, July 9, 2014 – A 27-member team will represent St Vincent and the Grenadines at the XX Commonwealth Games in Glasgow, Scotland from July 23 to August 3.

The St Vincent and the Grenadines Commonwealth Games Association on Wednesday released the composition of the team which will participate in Athletics, Cycling, Squash, Swimming, and Table Tennis.

The team is led by Kineke Alexander, the 2013 Central American and Caribbean (CAC) 200 metres gold medallist. The other track and field athletes are Courtney Williams, Courtney Bascombe, Brandon Valentine-Parris, Josh Hamilton, Reuberth Boyde, Delohnni Nico-Samuel and Kimorie Shearman.

Cammie Adams and Hansel Orano Andrews will compete in cycling; James Bentick, Jason Doyle, Othniel Bailey, Kevin Hannaway and Jules Snagg in squash; Adora Lawrence, Issy Joachim, Storm Gooding, Nikolas Sylvester, Dillon Gooding, Storm Halbich and Kyle Dougan in swimming and Romano Spencer, Kavir Gaymes Jr, Javier De Shong, Shenica Velox and Sean Stanley in table tennis.

The officials are Jacintha Ballantyne (Chef de Mission); Stephen Joachim (Team Manager); Tyrone James (Manager Athletics), Chester Morgan ( Athletics Coach), Kim Halbich (Swimming Official), Emmerson Holder (Cycling Official) and Orville Haslam (Table Tennis Official).

St Vincent and the Grenadines first participated in the Commonwealth Games, then called Empire Games, in 1958, in Cardiff, Wales. Elton Anderson, who contested the 100yds and 200yds respectively, is the lone survivor of the team to Cardiff. The other members were Godfrey Roberts who compete in the Long and High Jump and Sap Coombs, the Manager.

SVG won their first medal at these Games when in 1970, in Edinburgh, Scotland, George Manners copped bronze in the Weightlifting (90Kg Combined).

Four years later, Frankie Lucas of New Montrose, won a gold medal by the knockout route in Boxing in Christchurch, New Zealand (75Kg). It took another 20 years before St Vincent and the Grenadines mounted the top spot on the podium when Natasha Mayers won the 100m in controversial circumstances in Delhi, India.

Mayers originally finished third but moved to the top after England and Nigeria successfully protested a false start by Sally Pearson of Australia. Nigeria’s Osayemi Oludamola, who finished second, was found to have the stimulant methylhexaneamine in her system and was disqualified.

Share This Page:

Tweet





