The Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games will be bigger than ever with more medals and additional events for female and Para-Sport athletes it was revealed today (Tuesday, May 1).

The Glasgow 2014 Organising Committee (OC) today unveiled its final Sports Programme. As well as confirming details of the events to be held across 17 sports and 11 days of competition, Glasgow 2014's Sports Programme will feature additional highlights including:

* The biggest-ever number of Para-Sports Medals in Commonwealth Games History - 22 Medal events in total

* Innovative new Triathlon Mixed Relay event

* First Para-Sport Cycling (Track) event included in the Games

*Additional participation and medal opportunities for female athletes in Shooting

All additional opportunities for athletes and spectators alike will be delivered within existing Games budgets, planning and resources.

Announcing the final Sports Programme of 256 Medal events Glasgow 2014's Chief Executive David Grevemberg said:

"Following the completion of the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) Sports Programme Review, Glasgow 2014 is delighted to announce a final Sports Programme which is true to our vision of delivering an outstanding athlete centred and sports focused Games for Scotland that is on time and on budget.

I'm delighted that in delivering 17 sports over 11 days of competition we have been able to increase our commitments to competition and medal opportunities by offering greater opportunities for female and Para-Sport athletes and I'm especially proud that Glasgow 2014 will offer more events and medal opportunities for Para-Sport athletes than any Commonwealth Games in history."

The announcement of additions to Glasgow 2014's Sports Programme has been warmly welcome by International Sports Organisations.

Sir Philip Craven, President of the International Paralympic Committee, said:

"It is tremendous news that Glasgow will host more Para-Sport events than any other previous Commonwealth Games and underlines the growth and popularity of Para-Sport at all levels.

"To have 22 Medal events included in the Games in 2014, just two years after London, will ensure that Commonwealth athletes can continue to perform on the big stage in front of thousands of spectators."

Marisol Casado, International Triathlon Union President and IOC member said:

“Triathlon Mixed Relay is a young, fresh and innovative sport which embraces the ideals of teamwork and gender equality. We feel that that it will fit perfectly with the ethos of Glasgow 2014. We are delighted the Glasgow 2014 Organising Committee has embraced this exhilarating event.“

Glasgow 2014 Games Partners, the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council also welcomed finalisation of a Sports Programme which will be experienced by an estimated worldwide TV audience of more than one billion.

Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport, Shona Robison said:

“Glasgow 2014 is set to be the biggest and most inclusive Commonwealth Games, with new events for female and Para-Sport athletes within a fantastic Sports Programme of more than 250 Medal events across 17 sports and over 11 days of competition. This will be the biggest multi-sports event that Scotland has ever hosted and the Sports Programme will build excitement among athletes and give Scots a taste of what’s to come in just over two years’ time.”

Councillor Archie Graham, Executive Member for the Commonwealth Games at Glasgow City Council, said:

“The expansion of the Sports Programme for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games is fantastic news. This will make the Games even more distinctive and will present new challenges to the athletes competing in 2014 and more opportunities for the spectators coming to see them.”