A gymnast earlier helped to publicise the city's 2014 Games bid

The evaluation commission of the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) Glasgow's proposals were "grounded in a thoughtful and practical approach".

The conclusion of the report was markedly more upbeat than the verdict on the city's Nigerian rivals.

A final decision on the 2014 venue will be made on 9 November.

The evaluation commission said: "Glasgow has demonstrated an understanding of the major requirements to stage the Commonwealth Games."

It said "venue and legacy issues were appropriately addressed with obvious sensitivity to Glasgow's long-term needs".

Glasgow will host the best Games the Commonwealth has ever seen

Steven Purcell

Glasgow City Council's leader

Officials were less complimentary about the Nigerian city of Abuja.

The report into Abuja's bid said "there are a number of areas which require further attention and development within the proposals put forward" and "any decision to award the Games to Abuja should be conditional on these matters being addressed".

It also questioned Abuja's ability to raise £80m through marketing, describing that aim as "a significant challenge and risk to the Games budget".

Sports minister Stewart Maxwell welcomed the report's findings.

He said: "I'm delighted that the evaluation commission report recognises how much hard work and enthusiasm has gone into preparing Scotland's Commonwealth Games bid.

'Ringing endorsement'

"The report says that Glasgow has shown it has the ability to stage the 2014 Commonwealth Games to a standard which would continue to enhance the image and prestige of the Games."

Steven Purcell, leader of Glasgow City Council, said: "This report backs up what we have been trying to say all along.

"Given the chance, Glasgow will host the best Games the Commonwealth has ever seen.

Louise Martin, chair of the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, said: "They have recognised that we have looked at every detail of our Games - from venues to transport to culture to make sure that should we win, everyone who comes to Scotland in 2014 will have the performance and time of their lives."

Glasgow Chamber of Commerce chief executive Dr Lesley Sawers said the report was another "ringing endorsement" of the standard and quality of Glasgow's bid.