Updated 11 July 2014, 15:57 AEST

Vanuatu's team for Glasgow 2014 is making their final preparations and for some athletes, representing the country runs in the family.

At the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow, Scotland, Vanuatu will be represented in two sports: judo and table tennis.

The judo team has been making their final preparations in Cumbria, in north-west England, training four times a day to refine their technique and practice competing.

Vanuatu's judo team at pre-Commonwealth Games training in England. Photo: Vanuatu Judo Team.

Team manager Ted Drew says the athletes, called judoka, are reaching their peak.

“They're pretty busy, they're all eating well and we weigh them every day to make sure they're within their weight categories but they've never been better,” he says.

The toughest nations to beat, according to Mr Drew, will be “Britain, Scotland, Wales, New Zealand, Australia of course, South Africa, Canada, they're the established nations.” But he admits it’s nothing like the Olympic Games when the field includes Japan, China and France.

"Winning a medal at this stage is the great hope...they’ve played in Australia, they’ve played in New Zealand but they’ve always been out matched by people who’ve gone to many more tournaments than they have,” says Mr Drew.

Vanuatu’s previous best in international judo competition was at the Oceania Judo Championships in 2012 when Amata Fiakaifonu took home a silver in the over 70kg cadet women’s division.

Ms Fiakaifonu will not be competing in Glasgow but her brother Nazario Fiakaifonu will compete in the over 100kg division.

Vanuatu's Judo team with the members of Kendal Dojo. Photo: Vanuatu Judo Team.

Judo is a competition between two people who use their balance, power and movement to overcome the other.

To win a judo match you score a point, called ippon, which you can do by throwing an opponent onto their back, holding an opponent down for 25 seconds or by earning a series of half points, called waza-ari. Half points can be earned by throwing an opponent only partly onto their back, holding an opponent down for 20 seconds, or if an opponent violates the rules.

“A match is five minutes but it can be over in seven seconds with a major throw," Mr Drew explains.

Judo is a sport for all kinds of people, according to Mr Drew: “we have big people, little people, round people, short people, fat people, we've got them all. And what they have to do is work out what technique work out for them best.”

Although judo can be used as a form of self-defence, Mr Drew says those who participate in judo in Vanuatu do it primarily as a sport. “You can apply judo in a self defence context but it is primarily a sport and an art form," he says.

The word judo means ‘the gentle way’ and a part of teaching may include learning to give way instead of using force to overcome a stronger opponent.

"There is a philosophy behind judo and basically we teach people to be nice people. We encourage them to look after their friends, we encourage them not to bully, we encourage them to help each other in the training process," Mr Drew says.

Vanuatu's table tennis team before competing at the Oceania Championships in April. Photo: Vanuatu Table Tennis.

Vanuatu’s table tennis team could be described as a family affair. The eight-member team includes a brother and sister and a set of twins.

Team manager and player Anolyn Lulu will be competing in her third Commonwealth Games and her brother Ham Lulu will be playing in his second. For twins Rosana and Roana Abel, it will be their first.

Anolyn says it’s important for the young members of the team making their debut to play with, and against, the top level players.

"One thing about our team this year is that we have four new players, all these four players are young and we are putting them in this tournament preparing them for the 2017 [Pacific] Mini Games that Vanuatu will host in the upcoming years...the level of competition [in Glasgow] will be very high but we want to put these players so that they experience a higher level of competition,” she explains.

The team’s Commonwealth Games preparation has included the Oceania Championships and three weeks training in China.

"Training’s really good, we also have a very good coach, Chinese coach, who came here last year and he'll be here for two years. So the training back home is really going well,” says Ms Lulu.

Despite both male and female teams coming second last at the previous Commonwealth Games in New Delhi, Ms Lulu says she was happy with how the individual matches went.

“For example in our mixed doubles, myself and Yoshua, really played well against the team from England so we really get a few sets out of the players. So that was a very good performance for our team...this time we're looking forward to perform well. After we've been to the Olympic Games, myself and Yoshua, and we've been to the Oceania Cup a few years back, so we feel that this Commonwealth Games we'll go better," she says.

Anolyn and Ham’s sister Emmeline Lulu has also represented Vanuatu in table tennis at an international level. Anolyn and Emmeline were members of Vanuatu’s gold medal winning team at the 2003 Pacific Games and the 2005 Pacific Mini Games.

"It's a good feeling having my brother playing table tennis as well and both of us representing Vanuatu in the Commonwealth Games competition. It's a good feeling, I feel proud," Ms Lulu says.

Anolyn Lulu's patriotic manicure at the 2011 Pacific Games. Photo: Cynthia Badjoël.

Vanuatu’s Commonwealth Games team:

Judo: Joe Mahit (-66kgs), Rexly Theuil (-66kgs), Marceau Rouvoune (-73kgs), Nazario Fiakaifonu (+100kgs), Florence Daoleuang (coach)

Table tennis: Yoshua Shing, Ham Lulu, Alan Lin, Samuel Saul, Anolyn Lulu, Pareina Matariki, Rosanna Abel, Roanna Abel, Li Weiyong (coach)