May 2007 : Our Candidate City File is finished and submitted

After 18 months of planning, writing and editing, we submitted our Candidate City File (CCF). A huge piece of work, this document details all of our plans for the Commonwealth Games in 2014. It’s a long read, but a good one!

Diageo the world's leading premium drinks company, was confirmed as our 6th and final major supporter, bringing an even greater profile for Scotland's Bid and the support of their 4000 employees based in Scotland.

Read a summary document (7.9MB)

Read the CCF (30.9MB) and Block Plans (19.3MB)

April 2007 : Our international travel is complete

We saw the end of our international travel programme. Since June 2006, Glasgow 2014 have visited every corner of the world to find out first-hand what the voters want. We visited a total of 67 countries, from Montserrat to Vanuatu. It was a mammoth task, but well worth it. We have shared our vision, and raised awareness of everything our great city has to offer our international friends.

March 2007: The bid train on the tracks for the first time



We launched our unique Bid Train, a specially branded train produced by First Scotrail, one of our major supporters. The train will travel all over Scotland spreading our bid message and urging even more Scots to do their bit and pledge their support.

February 2007 : More partners join the project

February 2007 saw us confirm BBC Scotland as our 5th major supporter. One of the most respected brands in the world, the BBC brings with them an unrivalled knowledge of the Commonwealth Games. As a major supporter, the BBC is committed to producing all of our publicity films until decision day on November 9 2007.

February also saw the Hilton confirmed as our Official Bid Partner Hotel, and Navy Blue appointed as the designers of our Candidate City File.

January 2007 : Our sports programme is announced

We celebrated the New Year by announcing which sports had made it onto the Glasgow 2014 sports programme.

As First Minister Jack McConnell said that, “Today’s announcement is about more than confirming the sports that will be in the Games - it is about looking into the future and imagining what those Games will look like. In those eleven days, sport would transform a city, inspire a country and enthral millions of people. Glasgow 2014 will be an event like no other, one that the whole world will want to be a part of.”

December 2006 : Overwhelming public support reaches 1.5 million pledges

This month saw us reach another milestone, when we received our 1.5 millionth pledge of support on this website. The public backing has been nothing short of extraordinary.

November 2006 : One year until decision day

November 9 2006 marked exactly one year to go until decision day. Our community rallied again to say loud and clear that Glasgow is the perfect choice for the 2014 Games.

We also welcomed Olympic Legend, Michael Johnson to the city in November. He visited school children in Dalmarnock, telling them that with hard work and dedication they can be successful in whatever they chose to do with their lives. It was an inspirational talk by the legendary athlete.

October 2006 : The first voting delegates arrive in Glasgow

The Commonwealth Games Federation European Group spent three days in Glasgow, looking at our bid and finding out what our vision of a Glasgow Games would look like. During their spare time, they enjoyed a little local culture, danced at a ceilidh and took in a football match at the famous Ibrox Stadium, home of Glasgow Rangers Football Club.

September 2006 : Glasgow 2014 Athletes' Commission is created and we attract corporate sponsors

In September 2006 our Glasgow 2014 Athletes’ Commission was created. As we are determined to make our Games the most athlete-centred ever, we encouraged their involvement and feedback into every part of our bid, from transport to security. Their knowledge will be invaluable in the race for 2014.

September was also the month where we attracted our first major supporters. Clydesdale Bank, First Group, Highland Spring and O2 signed up to back our bid. This gave them exclusive access to our logo and marketing rights, and made the significant sum of over £1million pounds in goods, services and cash available to Glasgow2014. This money will be used to sell Scotland’s bid to the world.

We also welcomed the President of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Mike Fennell, to Glasgow in September. He was here for the first ever Commonwealth Sports Development Conference . He also took the chance to view some of our existing facilities, as well as examine our plans for the future.

July 2006 : Dalmarnock is confirmed as the ‘Athletes' Village’ site

Dalmarnock in the East End of Glasgow was confirmed as the site of the Athletes’ Village in July 2006. This is a massive site, around twice the size of the village in Melbourne. As well as providing the athletes with somewhere to live during the competition, there will be places to train and relax. When the Games are over, a new community will be born on the banks of our famous River Clyde.

June 2006 : The start of our international travel programme

In order to make sure our bid reflects the wishes and needs of the Commonwealth, we decided to visit as many as possible of the 71 countries who take part in the Games.

The first stop was Jamaica, where we met with the National Olympic Committee and were looked after for two days by the President of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Mike Fennell.

May 2006 : Our millionth pledge of support from the public



This incredible feat demonstrated the strength of feeling that our bid is generating among Scots across the Globe. Emma Duffy from Glasgow was the millionth person. A primary teacher, she hopes that some of her current pupils will be athletes competing on Scottish soil in 2014.

March 2006 : Pitch to the Commonwealth Games Federation in Melbourne

In March 2006, we made our initial pitch to the Commonwealth Games Federation at the Melbourne Games. During our ten minute presentation, the First Minister, the Leader of Glasgow City Council and the Chair of the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland set out the main elements of our bid and committed National and Local Government to securing the 2014 Commonwealth Games.

View the DVDs which were shown at our presentation in Melbourne. For the latest information on all aspects of the bid, please download a copy of the Melbourne Bid Brochure [PDF - 2MB] .

January 2006 : Branding and public support campaign is launched

On Monday, January 9 official branding for our bid was unveiled. The First Minister also launched a campaign to persuade people to publicly declare their support for our bid via this website.



Find out how you can support our bid .

November 2005 : Glasgow becomes Scotland’s official candidate city

On Thursday, November 15, as First Minister McConnell signed the document to be lodged with the Commonwealth Games Federation which officially designated Glasgow as Scotland’s candidate city to bid for the 2014 Commonwealth Games.

On Wednesday, November 2 UK Sports Ministers representing England, Wales and Northern Ireland pledged to back Scotland’s bid for the games.

In June 2005 the Assessment Group made a positive recommendation that Glasgow should bid to host the 2014 Games.

August 2005 : Our intention to host the games is announced

The formal announcement of Glasgow's intention to host the games was made by the First Minister at Hampden Park, one of the proposed venues, on Tuesday, August 16.



Mr McConnell said: “The Commonwealth Games has the potential to change our country. Taking the bold step to bring one of the largest events in the world to Scotland shows the scale of our ambition as a nation and the confidence we have in our biggest city.”

May 2005 : Our bid is confirmed to have substantial merits



Our Bid Assessment Group received the results of a three-month study by PMP Consultants. This 300-page report concluded that our bid would have ‘substantial merits’ based on six key objectives:

To meet and exceed the quality standards set by the Commonwealth Games Federation for the Games, through provision of world class sports facilities, Games Village and media operations.

To ensure that there is a solid infrastructure of transport, technology, security and accommodation, to support the Games for Glasgow and Scotland.

To ensure sustainability in relation to future use of facilities, and in ensuring the sporting and economic legacies of the Games, for Glasgow and Scotland.

To promote an inclusive approach, by ensuring the involvement of the whole community and partner organisations, in the Games and associated cultural events.

To demonstrate that the bid is well grounded, taking account of the track record of the city in hosting previous major events, and of the aspirations of the local community.

To be realistic about likely capital and revenue costs, based on current knowledge and expectations.

November 2004 : Work starts to assess our bid proposals



In November 2004, our Bid Assessment Group was set up and we started work on the development of our proposals. This included research into the long-term economic benefits of the Games to Glasgow and Scotland.