08th March 2010

Glasgow 2014 has unveiled a new brand identity and web site at an event at the Clyde Auditorium, which will be the venue for the Weightlifting Competition during the Games. As with all previous Games, and as set out in the Host City Contract, Glasgow 2014 has created a completely new Games brand with the primary aim of offering its exclusive use to companies to generate revenue through sponsorship. The creative concept behind the brand is derived from the basis of all sport - Time, Data, and Measurement. Who jumps the highest, swims the fastest, lifts the heaviest. The brand identity is made up of four distinct parts, based on Time, Data and Measurement: 1. The Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games will be the 20th Games. This is a landmark number that adds to Glasgow’s pride in being its host. The outer ring, that encompasses the others, is a strong, vibrant red - the official “True Red” of the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) palette. 2. There will be 17 sports on the programme at Glasgow 2014. The next ring of the brand identity, in “Triumph Yellow” from the CGF palette, represents the number of sports. It’s exactly 17/20ths of the full circle. 3. Glasgow 2014 will host 11 days of competition, which are represented in the third ring of the brand identity, rendered in the CGF’s “Heritage blue”, and making up 11/20ths of the circle. 4. At the heart of our brand identity is 1 Host City, represented by “G” for Glasgow, meaning “Dear Green Place” in Gaelic, and is in a suitably vibrant green. The selection panel that chose and approved the final logo included Paul Stickley, Head of Visual Communication at the Glasgow School of Art, Shirley Webb, a Commonwealth and Olympic athlete, and two directors from the Glasgow 2014 Organising Committee. John Scott, Chief Executive of the Glasgow 2014 Organising Committee said: “Today is a big milestone for everyone involved in the planning for Glasgow 2014, as the unveiling of the new brand symbolises the start of a new and exciting journey towards the Games. “The brand identity we used for the bid was excellent – it did its job, and it won support from all over Scotland and helped us to win the Games. We now need to raise the revenue required to help stage the Games through selling the rights to the brand identity as sponsorship. I am confident that its distinct style, its inherent element of fun and flexibility for both on and off line environments will attract organisations wishing to be associated with the Commonwealth Games to become our sponsors.” Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said: "I want Glasgow 2014 to be a great success and the Scottish Government has been working hard to ensure that the entire country will benefit from the opportunities that this world class event will bring to Scotland. "The new brand is much more than a marketing logo. Over the next four years everyone will become familiar with this distinctive brand and begin to identify with it. We want this unique design to inspire all Scots to get behind the Games and see Glasgow 2014 as an event for the whole country. With all of Scotland on board we can make our Commonwealth Games a fantastic sporting event and a catalyst for positive change in our nation." Councillor Jim Coleman, Acting Leader of Glasgow City Council, said: “Glasgow is a stylish and vibrant city and the new Games brand expresses that perfectly. I am delighted that a Glasgow agency beat some of the best agencies in the world in the competition to design the brand. As it becomes recognised around the world this will be an advert not just for Glasgow 2014 but for all the talented people working in Glasgow’s creative industries.” Shirley Webb, Scottish Record Holder and Double Commonwealth Games athlete said: “As an athlete I have been to two Commonwealth Games and there are personal images that I have stored away which will live with me forever, and I am sure that this new logo will form the beginning of photo albums of thousands of athletes, volunteers and spectators around the world. The journey to select Glasgow’s Commonwealth Games identity has been fascinating, and each and every one of the brilliantly creative people we met were genuinely excited and inspired by the prospect of working with the Games. It will be amazing to see the logo and the Games-buzz grow over the next four years.” Chief Executive of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Mike Hooper said: “The Commonwealth Games Federation worked very closely with Glasgow 2014 and design agency Marque in the development of the new brand. We are very pleased with the results, it’s original and refreshing with a great degree of flexibility, and we look forward to seeing the new brand being used to promote the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games both within Scotland and throughout the Commonwealth.” Michael Cavanagh, Chairman of Commonwealth Games Scotland said: “The essence of the logo communicates everything that is intrinsic to sporting performance in terms of Time, Data and Measurement. These are all criteria that prospective Team Scotland athletes will be driven by, as they strive towards achieving success at Glasgow 2014. We are delighted that the brand reflects the continued commitment to an athlete-centred and sport focused Games.” Mark Noe, Managing Director of Marque said: "We are privileged to have had the opportunity to create the brand identity for such a significant event as the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games. The identity is one which is grounded in integrity and design rigour and we are proud of the legacy that it will leave behind for Glasgow and Scotland. We hope that the identity will become an iconic symbol celebrating a very special moment in time – and will become synonymous with quality, achievement and vision.” Arthur Cormack, Chair of Bòrd na Gàidhlig, said: “Bòrd na Gàidhlig welcomes the Gaelic version of the logo for the Glaschu 2014 Commonwealth Games and we have been happy to work with the Glaschu 2014 team in helping them develop their identity. Given the unique importance of Gaelic to Scotland and the many Scots in the diaspora throughout the Commonwealth, we believe it should be seen, heard and spoken as widely as possible. “Given the worldwide interest there will be in the Games when they take place in Glasgow, a city with a large number of Gaelic speakers, we believe they offer an exciting opportunity for Gaelic to be seen and, we hope, heard and appreciated in an international setting. We hope this is just the start; we wish the Games well and look forward to working further with Glaschu 2014 to enhance the status of Gaelic within this hugely significant event.”

For the Gaelic version of this press release, please click here