Kylie Minogue and Lulu made Glasgow’s Hampden Park the scene for one giant after-party last night with a brash, gaudy and yet strangely intimate closing ceremony, bringing Glasgow’s 11-day spectacular to a conclusion with the most fitting flourish.

Amid the speeches and the protocol, there was a palpable sense of rapture as the stadium was transformed into a sprawling, psychedelic festival site more reminiscent of Glastonbury than Glasgow.

As a closing rendition of Auld Lang Syne, led by a lone bagpiper on the roof, washed around this fabled old ground it was hard not to echo the dignitaries’ verdict that these had been the people’s Games.

Kylie Minogue performs during the Closing Ceremony for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games (Getty Images)

It was an occasion that cut against cynicism and party politics as Glasgow savoured its last revelries in the evening sun, which emerged belatedly after a day of biblical downpours. It was an opportunity to celebrate, to refresh the country’s sense of confidence in itself.

“Sport unites us,” said Lord Smith of Kelvin, chairman of Glasgow 2014, in front of an audience that included Prime Minister David Cameron, Ed Miliband, Nick Clegg and the Earl of Wessex, representing the Queen. “We are a Commonwealth connected.”

For 11 days, Alex Salmond had stuck fast to his “self-denying ordinance” not to use the Commonwealths for the Scottish National Party’s gain ahead of next month’s referendum on independence.

And this occasion was designed essentially as a vast house party, which opened with Lulu, resplendent in tartan trousers, belting out her version of the Isley Brothers’ ‘Shout’.

Goodbye Glasgow: The curtain comes down on the 2014 Commonwealth Games at Hampden Park on Sunday night (Getty Images)

The athletes emerged from 687 pop-up tents, dotted around the stadium in a fashion more reminiscent of Glastonbury than Glasgow.

But amid the merriment, there was also a note of solemnity ahead of the First World War commemorations, as the massed pipes and drums of the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo played ‘The Bloody Fields of Flanders’.

In a tribute to the working people of Glasgow, and to all the red-clad ‘Clydesider’ volunteers, Deacon Blue performed their 1987 song ‘Dignity’, telling the story of the dreams of a council rubbish-collector as a stream of bin vans entered the arena right on cue.

The speeches are conventionally the longueurs in such ceremonies, and yet Prince Imran of Malaysia, president of the Commonwealth Games Federation, managed perhaps the loudest cheer of the night when he described the Games as the “best ever”, before adding in the local vernacular: “Glasgow, you were pure dead brilliant”.

Dancers perform during the Closing Ceremony for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games at Hampden Park (Getty Images)

Sadie Docherty, Lord Provost of Glasgow, looked on the verge of tears as she performed the handover to the Gold Coast for the Commonwealths in 2018.

Then, of course, there was Kylie. Or should that be Ceilidh? With a medley of hits encompassing her entire 25-year career, from ‘Locomotion’ to ‘All the Lovers’, Minogue took the 45,000 at Hampden through an hour of joyously uninhibited dancing, stringing out final number ‘Can’t Get You Out of My Head’ with a majestic bombast.

The bacchanals gave way, at the end, to Dougie Maclean’s touching rendition of his song ‘Caledonia’, written on a beach in France in an expression of his longing to Scotland again.

One liked to imagine that the feeling was, among many of the athletes, mutual.

The tens of thousands who thronged Buchanan Street in the City Centre readily agreed.

Singer Lulu performs during the Closing Ceremony for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games (Getty Images)

The joie de vivre in this city has been infectious. In every department, Glasgow has given ample evidence of why Daniel Defoe, author of Robinson Crusoe, described it back in 1707 as a “very fine” place.

The Games have been a vindication, too, of the investment in Olympic sports post-2012. After Britain’s total of 29 gold medals at those Games, the greatest haul since 1908, England supplanted Australia at the summit of the Commonwealth medal table for the first time in 28 years, with 58 golds to 49.

They Commonwealths had a resonance from London to Lerwick, as the beaming expression of little Erraid Davies proved, after the para-breaststroker from the Shetland Islands became the youngest ever Commonwealth medallist at 13. And crucially, Usain Bolt brought the stardust.

Dispelling all the uncertainty over whether he would grace Scotland with his presence, and the swirl of controversy over his attitude to Glasgow’s weather, the fastest man on the planet accomplished exactly what he hoped for, anchoring the Jamaican sprint quartet to a brilliant win in the 4x100 metres relay to seize his first Commonwealth title.

Just to leave his hosts in no doubt as to how much he loved them, he had performed a full lap of honour for the Hampden audience, allowing selfies galore as he wrapped himself in a blue-and-green tartan tammy.

Bolt was already on a flight back to Jamaica last night, ready to begin preparations for his next race in Rio de Janeiro in a fortnight’s time, but his imprint upon Glasgow was indelible.

The Games have reflected, ultimately, the continued relevance of the Commonwealth itself. No mere relic of empire, it was conceived in 1949 as a body of equal partnership in which former masters and servants could be reconciled – and it has felt just so in Glasgow, Olympic champions from the home nations sharing the same stage as shooters from the south Atlantic outpost of St Helena, who needed 10 days just to reach Scotland in the first place.

Anachronistic? The Queen would not hear of it, needing no invitation to appear for the opening ceremony, while the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have sampled diverse delights from backstroke heats at Tollcross pool to the team gymnastics.

In four years’ time, we head to the Gold Coast in Australia, safe in the knowledge that the Queenslanders will be hard pushed indeed to surpass Glasgow’s glorious show.