The North American retailers plan to develop a common safety standard for the factories by October and to create a clearinghouse to share information among themselves about which factories have been approved for production and which need safety improvements.

Their plan calls for “shared accountability” in responding to those safety problems: the companies would work closely with the factory owners, the government of Bangladesh and various government and aid agencies to figure out ways to finance safety improvements. If serious safety problems were discovered at a particular factory, the plan’s director would inform the Bangladeshi government, the factory owner and what the group calls the factory’s “worker participation committee,” a group to be elected by a factory’s workers.

That differs from the way retailers in the European-dominated plan take responsibility for safety violations. The Europeans pledge to ensure that there is money to fix serious fire and building safety problems in any of the factories they use in Bangladesh.

Under the American plan, the onus is on factory owners to improve their workplaces. Unlike the European group, the North American retailers are not promising to finance needed improvements, outside of the loans. Essentially, if a factory is not up to par and does not fix the problems itself, the American retailers say they will no longer do business there.

“In terms of legal liability, if a worker reports a factory is not measuring up, we have the measures to respond, to investigate,” said Jay Jorgensen, global chief compliance officer for Wal-Mart. “If a factory is not meeting the standards,” he said, “under our agreement they’re going to be terminated. That’s the ultimate pressure point on a factory to treat its workers well — the continuation of business.”

Five labor rights groups, including the Worker Rights Consortium, the Clean Clothes Campaign and United Students Against Sweatshops, criticized the American plan. “Wal-Mart, Gap and the corporations that have chosen to join them, are unwilling to commit to a program under which they actually have to keep the promises they make to workers and accept financial responsibility for ensuring that their factories are made safe,” the groups said in a statement.

The five organizations faulted the plan for being “company-developed and company-controlled,” adding that “under the Gap/Wal-Mart scheme, brands and retailers are not obligated to pay one cent toward the renovation and repair of their factories in Bangladesh.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The retailers said repeatedly that their plan contained many of the same elements as the European-dominated effort: inspections of all factories, development of remediation plans, sharing of information on the inspections and safety training for Bangladeshi workers.

“We may have two plans — the alliance and the accord — but we have one shared purpose and that purpose is to improve worker safety in garment factories in Bangladesh,” said Bobbi Silten, senior vice president for global responsibility at Gap and president of the Gap Foundation.

Bill Chandler, a spokesman for Gap, said that the North American agreement “puts specific dollar amounts” into place; the European agreement does not.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

One retail executive said that the American retailers were worried about liability issues wrapped up in the heavily European accord.

“The main difference, the reason we couldn’t sign the accord, is Europe has a different legal environment than we do in the United States and Canada. The accord had some provisions that in the U.S. and Canada would subject us to potentially unlimited legal liability and litigation,” Mr. Jorgensen said. Regarding the funds that the North American retailers are offering, he said, “we don’t want one dollar of that to go to lawyers — we want every cent of that to go to the factories.”

Mr. Jorgensen said the $100 million in loans and other financing was an important component. “The Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers Association has asked that financing be made available,” he said. “It’s hard to get loans there, and if you get a loan, it’s expensive. We’re trying to make capital available on a low-cost basis so that repairing a situation where safety issues doesn’t go unremediated because of financing problems.”

Labor rights advocates, however, called the plan inadequate.

“It’s clever,” said Scott Nova, executive director of the Worker Rights Consortium, a monitoring group based in Washington. “It’s designed to sound like the accord. They talk about inspections. They talk about renovations. They can use all the rhetoric they choose, but if you look at the substance, there’s very little there.”

He added, “They can walk away whenever they want and there is no real obligation to pay a penny to repair and renovate factories.”

Under the terms of the agreement, participating retailers can leave the alliance whenever they like, though if they do so before two years are up, they must pay what remains of their five-year financial commitment to the alliance.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The 70 companies in the European-dominated effort announced details of their plan on Monday, saying they would have all of the factories they use in Bangladesh inspected within nine months and would have remediation plans developed for those with safety problems. They pledged “to ensure that sufficient funds are available to pay for renovations and other safety improvements.”

Bangladesh is the world’s second-largest apparel exporting nation, after China; Europe buys about 60 percent of its exports and the United States around 25 percent.

The beginning of the American effort was announced in May, as Wal-Mart, Gap and other American retailers felt pressure to act because the European-dominated accord was gathering momentum and because of the outcry after 1,129 workers died in a factory building collapse in Bangladesh in April.

The plan announced Wednesday includes J. C. Penney, Kohl’s, Carter’s and the Children’s Place, and was reached with the help of the Bipartisan Policy Center and two former United States senators from Maine, George J. Mitchell and Olympia J. Snowe.

Some American companies have joined the European-dominated plan, including Abercrombie & Fitch and PVH, the parent company of Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger.

Criticizing the American plan, Jyrki Raina, general secretary of IndustriALL, a federation with 50 million union members from 140 countries that played a major role in creating the accord, said, “Quite simply, it’s a pale imitation of the legally binding accord we have. This really shows the difference between a legally binding process and these voluntary initiatives, which haven’t functioned well in the past.”

The problems in Bangladesh’s garment industry have not affected the retail industry’s demand for cheap goods made there. The country’s Export Promotion Bureau said on Tuesday that exports in June rose 16.3 percent to $2.7 billion, based on strong clothing sales.