The website for one of the Bangladeshi garment factory companies, New Wave, which occupied three of the floors of Rana Plaza in Dhaka’s Savar district, indicates that at least half of those dead and injured were women and that many children may also be among the victims. The company provides crèche facilities for the children of its female workers on the 2nd, 6th and 7th floors of the building.

According to survivors several thousand workers and residents were in the building when it collapsed, but only 600 have so far been rescued. It is feared many more are dead.

Survivors said they had been evacuated from the building on Tuesday after several cracks appeared but their employers had ordered them to return to work this morning just one hour before the building collapsed.

The building, houses four garment factories which work 24 hours a day, a market, some residential apartments and a bank. All the upper floors were flattened in the collapse and only the ground floor remained intact.

Opposition leaders cancelled a one day strike in the capital Dhaka to assist the rescue effort, while witnesses at the scene on Dhaka's Savar district said they could hear people trapped inside the rubble reciting prayers.

The collapsed building on the outskirts of Bangladesh's capital (Reuters)

The implosion follows the fire at another Dhaka clothing factory building in November in which 112 people died and raises further questions over safety and working standards in the country's £13 billion garment industry which supplies many high street clothing brands in Britain and the United States. One of the factories in the building lists Benetton and Monsoon as clients.

Primark confirmed that "one of its suppliers occupied the second floor", adding that its "ethical trade team" was "working to collect information, assess which communities the workers come from, and to provide support where possible".

Monsoon said it had never bought supplies from New Wave's factory in the building. A statement from Matalan said that New Wave had been a supplier in the past "although we don't have any current production with them". The last time New Wave supplied Matalan was in February, a spokesman added.

Benetton denied being a customer of the factory.

Government officials said the building was illegal while home minister Muhiuddin Khan Alamgir said the building may "have collapsed due to faulty construction."

Hiralal Roy, a casualty doctor at Enam Hospital told the news agency AFP that 82 had so far been killed in the collapse and that 700 were being treated for injuries. Some of them are in a critical condition and may die. "The toll will rise as conditions of some injured were critical," he said.

One survivor, who said her name was Mousumi, aged 24, told the agency there were around 5000 people working in the building at the time it collapsed.

She and her colleagues had been forced to go back to work inside the building after being evacuated earlier after cracks were discovered. "The managers forced us to rejoin and just one hour after we entered the factory the building collapsed with a huge noise. I am injured. But I've not found my husband who was working on the fourth floor" she said.