Hasina’s Press Secretary Abul Kalam Azad said she also directed the law enforcers to arrest the owners of the five readymade garment factories located in the ill-fated building.



Inspector (Investigation) Aminur Rahman of the Savar Model Station told bdnews24.com the death count was 304 around 5:35pm on Friday.



On Thursday, Home Minister Muhiuddin Khan Alimgir had also ordered his arrest.



On Wednesday morning, the commercial building located near the Savar Bus Stand had caved in.



Around 2,000 people were reported injured and many more still missing. More than 3,000 workers were at work in the five garment units located in the building when the collapse occurred.



Allegations were also raised that workers were forced to work in the factories located in the ill-fated building despite cracks appearing in it on Tuesday.



Later, several cases were filed against Rana over the incident.



Of the five factories in the collapsed Rana Plaza, Mahbubur Rahman Tapas and Bazlus Samad Adnan are the owners of New Wave Bottoms and New Wave Styles, respectively.



Mohammad Aminul Islam owned two factories - Phantom Apparels and Track, while EtherTex is owned by Mohammad Anisur Rahman.



The Prime Minister ordered immediate action against those who forced workers into Rana Plaza despite knowledge of the lurking threat.



She told the parliament on Thursday that those responsible for these deaths would be handed down exemplary punishment.

But Hasina said Sohel Rana was not a member of Jubo League’s Savar unit committee, saying she had the list of the committee and it did not include his name.





However, Soheil Rana had circulated various posters across Savar claiming he is a Senior Joint Convener of the Juba League in the local municipality. The posters also had a picture of Member of Parliament Mohammad Towhid Jung Murad.The Home Minister had also ordered the arrest of Rana Plaza’s owner Soheil Rana on Thursday morning, but the man has been elusive.Police say they are continuing their efforts to nab him.Meanwhile, employees of Soheil Rana were seen moving his belongings from his house in his absence. They admitted that they were moving the belongings from his house at his orders but refused to divulge where he could be at the moment.