A protester holds a placard during a demonstration outside a Primark store (Picture: AFP/Getty Images)

Campaigners have surrounded Primark’s flagship store on Oxford Street to demand compensation for workers who died when an eight-storey factory complex collapsed in Bangladesh.

The catastrophe in capital Dhaka led to the death of more than 300 people and thousands had to be rescued.

It has since emerged Primark was supplied by the factory.

This has led to a petition being launched for the retail giant and other brands to compensate the families of workers killed or injured.

A petition has been launched by the protestors (Picture: AFP/Getty Images)

Speaking outside Primark’s Oxford Street store in central London, Murray Worthy, from campaign group War on Want, said: ‘We’re here to send a clear message to Primark that the 300 deaths in the Bangladesh building collapse were not an accident – they were entirely preventable deaths.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘If Primark had taken its responsibility to those workers seriously, no one need have died this week.’

The campaign group does not want a boycott but added there should be a full inquiry into the incident and companies involved should sign the Bangladesh Fire and Building Safety Agreement to end the ‘appallingly unsafe factory conditions’ in the country.

A shopper passes demonstrators outside clothing retailer Primark in central London April 27, 2013. The demonstrators were protesting following the collapse of a building in Bangladesh where low-cost garments were made for Western brands. North American and European chains, including British retailer Primark and Canada’s Loblaw, a unit of George Weston Ltd, said they were supplied by factories in the Rana Plaza building, which collapsed on Wednesday. REUTERS/Suzanne Plunkett Protestors demonstrate outside the Primark store on Oxford Street, central London after the collapse of a factory block in Bangladesh where workers made its clothes. Saturday April 27, 2013. Photo credit should read: Steve Parsons/PA Wire Protestors demonstrate outside the Primark store on Oxford Street, central London after the collapse of a factory block in Bangladesh where workers made its clothes. Saturday April 27, 2013. Photo credit should read: Steve Parsons/PA Wire Protestors demonstrate outside the Primark store on Oxford Street, central London after the collapse of a factory block in Bangladesh where workers made its clothes. Saturday April 27, 2013. Photo credit should read: Steve Parsons/PA Wire A shopper holds bags from Primark as protestors demonstrate outside the Primark store on Oxford Street, central London after the collapse of a factory block in Bangladesh where workers made its clothes. Saturday April 27, 2013. Steve Parsons/PA Wire Protesters hold posters as they demonstrate outside a Primark’s Oxford Street store (Picture: AFP/Getty) A petition has been launched by the protestors (Picture: AFP/Getty Images) Protesters hold posters as they demonstrate outside a Primark retailer shop in central London on April 27, 2013 to demand the company take responsibility for the collapse of a building in Bangladesh, which housed garment factories making clothes for Primark and other major brands. More than 300 died and 1,000 were injured as the rescue operation still continues. CARL COURT/AFP/Getty Images A protester holds a placard during a demonstration outside a Primark store (Picture: AFP/Getty Images)