Major retail companies behind the global Bangladesh Fire and Safety Accord showed their commitment to improving the lives of Bangladeshi garment workers at the kick-off meeting, held at the International Labour Organisation in Geneva today.

The companies alongside IndustriALL Global Union and UNI Global Union agreed to immediately move forward with implementing the Accord. The aim is to have safety inspectors on the ground as quickly as possible in order to begin to fix the most urgent problems.

The participants, including the Clean Clothes Campaign and the Worker Rights Consortium who have signed as witnesses to the agreement, said that the Accord was an opportunity to rectify the unacceptable risks currently faced by Bangladeshi garment workers because of poor standards on factory safety.

More than 1,100 people died in the Rana Plaza building collapse, Bangladesh’s largest industrial tragedy, sparking a worldwide debate on how to improve safety.

IndustriALL General Secretary Jyrki Raina said:

This is standard setting work from the over 40 founding signatory clothing brands of the legally binding Accord with IndustriALL Global Union and UNI Global Union. Workers everywhere will now seek to expand this historic Accord to other countries and to other industrial sectors. We are invigorated to work with this critical mass of market leading clothing brands and retailers to turn the sentiments of the Accord into reality in Bangladesh.

UNI Global Union General Secretary, Philip Jennings said:

It is time to roll up our sleeves and get on with the urgent task of improving factory safety in Bangladesh.

Work is now beginning on the implementation phase of the Accord.

Here is the list of companies who have signed the Bangladesh Fire and Safety Accord:

COMPANY SIGNATORIES:

Abercrombie & Fitch

Aldi Nord

Aldi South

Auchan

Bay City Textilhandels GmbH

Belotex

Benetton

Bonmarche

C&A

CAMAIEU

Carrefour

Charles Voegele

Comtex

Daytex

Debenham

El Corte Ingles

Ernstings's Family

Esprit

Fat Face

Gstar

H&M

Helly Hansen

Hema

Hess Natur-Textilien GmbH

Horizonte

Inditex

JBC

John Lewis

Juritex

Kik

Kmart (Australia)

LC WAIKIKI

Lidl

Loblaw

Mango

Marks and Spencer

Metro

Mothercare

N Brown

New Look

Next

Otto Group

Primark

PUMA

PVH

Rewe

S Olivier

Sainsbury

Scoop NYC

Sean John Apparel

Shop Direct Group

Stockmann

Switcher

Target (Australia)

Tchibo

Tesco

V&D

We Europe

Zeeman

Contacts:

Tom Grinter, IndustriALL, Mobile: +41 79 693 44 99,

[email protected]

Richard Elliott, UNI Global Union, Mobile: +41 79 794 9709,