The Rana Plaza Donor’s Trust Fund is backed by the International Labour Organization. The process to pay compensation officially starts on March 24; to date, Bonmarché, El Corte Inglés, Inditex, Mango, Mascot, Premier Clothing and Canada’s Loblaw are believed to have donated to the fund but it is less than a quarter of the money required.

About $40 million (U.S.) is needed to pay 3,000 workers or the families of those killed when the Rana Plaza collapsed on April 24, 2013.

The process to begin paying compensation to the victims of the Rana Plaza collapse is less than two weeks away, but only seven of the 28 international brands linked to garment factories in the building have contributed to a fund.

International unions and agencies such as IndustriALL, UNI Global Union and the Clean Clothes Campaign called upon brands Friday to commit to the fund.

“Since the beginning of negotiations we got commitments that brands will pay,” said Monica Kemperle of IndustriALL, a global union that is working with retailers and brands, under the leadership of the ILO. “Now we will see how serious brands are when we launch the Donor Trust funds on March 24.”

The collapse of the Rana Plaza, an eight-storey building in the Dhaka suburb of Savar, killed 1,129 workers, mostly women.

It is considered the deadliest garment-factory incident in history.

The U.K. retailer Primark, said IndustriALL, is among the brands yet to make a contribution to the fund.

But Chris Barrie, a spokesperson for Primark in London, said it will meet its promise of paying compensation before the end of April.

He pointed out that Primark has already paid about $3.2 million for short-term aid to all victims and their families. “. . . most of whom were making clothes for our competitors,” said Barrie, adding that the company will pay long-term compensation to workers at New Wave Bottoms, a Primark supplier.

The ILO and Primark are still in negotiations, he added.

Other brands yet to publicly pledge financial support for the fund include Walmart, Children’s Place and Benetton.

Claims processing will be carried out from an office in Savar. Families of those affected will be contacted and invited to come to the office to make their claim, said Tom Grinter of IndustriALL.

First payments are expected to be given in about six weeks, the first anniversary of the disaster.

In Toronto, Loblaw said it made the first transfer of compensation money last week.

“We have not announced the initial or potential total amount as it has not been finalized,” said Kevin Groh, a spokesperson for the company.

Loblaw is also the only Canadian signatory to the Bangladesh Accord, a legally binding, five-year agreement that compels companies to work with factories to improve safety.

Signed by 156 global brands and retailers, it released its first inspection report earlier this week.