Police said they have now recovered 705 dead bodies from the ruins of Rana Plaza, which housed a factory suppying the British retailers, Primark and Bonmarche.

The incident is now the worst disaster in the history of the garment industry.

Survivors from Rana Plaza’s five factories on Tuesday blocked a nearby road in protest at the failure of their employers to pay their wages or compensation for the injuries they suffered when the illegal construction collapsed last month after the owners ignored warnings from engineers that serious cracks meant it could topple at any moment.

Dhaka’s five main building inspectors told The Daily Telegraph that Rana Plaza was one of an estimated 20,000 new buildings currently being illegally used without final consent.

Since 2008 all new buildings in the Bangladesh capital have been required to apply for a final “occupation certificate” following a visit by inspectors to check they have been constructed in accordance with their original plans and used for their stated purpose.

Like many without this certificate, Rana Plaza was neither built according to its plans nor used for the stated commercial purposes.

Instead of the six floors the owner was permitted to build, there were eight, and while he was given permission for a commercial office block he rented its floors to industrial companies. Investigators believe the additional floors, the extra weight of the illegal factories’ machines, and heavy power generators on the roof were factors in Rana Plaza’s collapse.

Afsar Uddin, the inspector for Dhaka’s central business districts Motiheel and Narayanganj said buildings without final occupation certificates are not allowed to have water and electricity connections.

His fellow inspector, Sukamal Chakma, who controls five Dhaka districts said few applied because their buildings had deviated from approved plans. “It is important to get these certificates – to ensure safety of building. To get the occupier certificate is one kind of measure that means that the developer has built the buildings according to law,” he said.

Mobasshar Hossain, president of the Institute of Architects, said officials had failed to enforce the rules and allowed owners to occupy and let their buildings without obtaining clearance. If the authorities “enforced this rule on buildings then there would be no violations,” he said.

The cost of that failure increased to 704 lives on Tuesday with police officers warning the number will rise considerably higher yet. Most of the dead so far have been recovered from the rubble of only four of its eight floors.

Local government officials said they had been in talks with the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association for the workers to be paid their outstanding April salaries plus a further three months – £97. The surviving workers abandoned their protest on Tuesday after officials promised they would soon be paid. They are currently compiling lists of surviving employees to establish who must be paid and compensated.