Updated 7 May 2013, 22:04 AEST

Survivors of a building collapse in Bangladesh have blocked a main highway to demand payment from factory owners.

Hundreds of survivors of Bangladesh's worst industrial disaster have blocked a main highway to demand wages, as the death toll from the collapse of a nine-storey building passed 700.

Around 3,000 garment workers were on shift at the Rana Plaza complex at the time of the collapse on April 24.

Many of the staff were earning only around $38 dollars a month, making clothing for Western retailers such as Britain's Primark and the Spanish label Mango.

Employees are now demanding payment from factory owners, both for their wages and as compensation for injuries suffered when the complex caved in.

Police say around 400 survivors blocked a highway connecting the capital with the country's south and southwest on Tuesday by staging a sitdown protest.

The protests came as the army revealed the number of bodies pulled from the rubble stood at 705.

Army spokesman Captain Shahid Ahsan Bhuiyan has warned the toll could rise further as the recovery teams had only reached the fourth floor.

Authorities say 2,437 people were rescued alive from the ruins of the building, which housed five garment factories.

On Monday the Bangladeshi Government announced it would set up a new high-level panel to inspect thousands of garment factories for building flaws.

The government made a similar announcement after a devastating fire swept a garment factory in November last year, killing 111 workers, but subsequent inspections were widely derided as insufficient.

A preliminary government probe has blamed vibrations from giant generators combined with the vibrations of sewing machines for the building's collapse.

Police have arrested 12 people including the complex's proprietor Sohel Rana and four garment factory owners for forcing people to work on the day of the accident, even though cracks appeared in the structure the previous day.

Factory workers have held protests calling for tough punishment for those responsible and stronger safety regulations.

Bangladesh is the world's second-largest garment exporter after China. The industry accounts for over 40 per cent of its industrial workforce and 80 per cent of the nation's exports.

AFP