Joe Gibbs Racing signs Kyle Busch to multi-year contract extension

"We're on the same page it's just nice to have it done," JGR President J.D. Gibbs said. "… Nice to focus on what's coming in the future rather than what's to be done."

CONCORD, N.C. -- Before the third and final year of his contract with Joe Gibbs Racing, Kyle Busch has secured his future there.

Busch has won 12 races with the organization – eight in 2008 and four in 2009. He joined JGR after losing his ride at Hendrick Motorsports where Dale Earnhardt Jr. replaced him.

No third team yet at Stewart-Haas

Through the successful first year in which they notched four wins for Tony Stewart's No. 14 Chevrolet, at times Stewart-Haas Racing GM Bobby Hutchens said the organization's performance was stronger than things were internally.

That's why last season wasn't the right time, Hutchens said, for expansion into a three-team operation.

"We hadn't put the building blocks in place yet to build the right foundation to be as successful as this group of people wanted to be," Hutchens said. "To do that we needed to institute some processes into the shop, hire some people and put them in strategic places so we were in a position where we could absorb a third team."

Hutchens said they had some conversations with people about a third team and they've had a wish-list of drivers for a while of who they would want for their third team.

Etc.

Charlotte Motor Speedway, formerly Lowe's Motor Speedway, hosted about 100 fans for announcements about new seats on the track's frontstretch. ... In the spirit of earlier start times in the Sprint Cup series, Charlotte Motor Speedway also announced its Nationwide race will start at 2:30 p.m. this May instead of after dark as it had in the past. … What made Tony Stewart want to hire Ryan Newman? "Well, the first answer is his wife," Stewart quipped at his media tour press conference.

Read Tania Ganguli's blog at OrlandoSentinel.com/nutsandbolts or e-mail her at tganguli@orlandosentinel.com.