Bobby Labonte gets Daytona 500 ride after future was in doubt

Bobby Labonte will race with Phoenix Racing for the 2014 Daytona 500. (Photo: Jerome Miron, USA TODAY Sports) Story Highlights Labonte wasn't sure if he'd make another start in NASCAR Sprint Cup Series

He drove part time with Phoenix Racing in 2010

No crew chief, car number or sponsor were named in news release

As recently as a few weeks ago, Bobby Labonte wasn't sure if he'd ever make another start in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series.

Though he wasn't ready to retire, Labonte had lost his ride at JTG Daugherty Racing and said he was considering all of his options, including racing in the lower-tier Camping World Truck Series.

MORE: What NASCAR taught us in 2013

But Labonte -- the 2000 Cup champion -- didn't take long to find a new team for the Daytona 500. Phoenix Racing, for whom Labonte drove part-time in 2010, announced Tuesday it will field a second entry at Daytona for the veteran driver.

The move will reunite Labonte with former owner James Finch, who sold the team to Harry Scott Jr. last season but is still the chairman emeritus and came up with the idea to put Labonte in a second car (the team's primary driver has not been announced).

RYAN: NASCAR missed its most mischievous in 2013

In a news release, Phoenix Racing said Labonte would run "a number of races" for the team in 2014. No crew chief, car number or sponsor were named.

"I am grateful and excited to return to Daytona with Phoenix Racing," Labonte said. "The Daytona 500 is obviously a special event for everyone involved in the sport. I can't wait to get back in the car for my 22nd Daytona 500."

MORE: Fire training exercise on Mayfield's former mansion cancelled

Scott said Finch, who founded Phoenix Racing in 1989, "continues to be a valuable part of our team."

"(Scott) knew I would have to be weaned off racing," Finch said. "I can't quit cold turkey."

Labonte, a 21-time winner on NASCAR's premier circuit, hasn't won a race since 2003. His last top-five finish was in the 2011 Daytona 500, where he finished fourth.

There is no guarantee Labonte will make the race because a second car for Phoenix Racing would not have any owner points. But he could rely on a past champion's provisional if Kurt Busch does not use it (Busch's new No. 41 team will not have any owner points, either). The provisional goes to the most recent champion who needs it.

Follow Jeff Gluck on Twitter @jeff_gluck