Dale Earnhardt Jr. will be staying with Hendrick Motorsports for another five Sprint Cup seasons, keeping him with the NASCAR team through the end of 2017. Hendrick announced the completion of the extension Thursday morning.

Earnhardt's current deal was set to expire after the 2012 season, and the driver and team had been working on a new contract the past few months to avoid distractions next year.

"We're excited to have everything formalized and announced," team owner Rick Hendrick said in a statement. "Junior and I had a handshake agreement months ago, and we let other people work out the finer points from there. It was as simple and smooth as it gets.

"My feelings haven't changed since the day he first signed with us. I'm committed as ever to putting him in the best possible situation to be successful and compete for wins and championships."

Earnhardt, NASCAR's most popular driver, is ninth in the points standings and on pace to make the Chase for the Sprint Cup for the second time with Hendrick after missing the 10-race title run the past two seasons. He has one victory with the team in June 2008 at Michigan International Speedway.

USA TODAY Sports on Twitter! Follow Nate Ryan on Twitter at @nateryan. To get the latest sports news from USA TODAY, including game results, columns and features, follow us on Twitter at @USATODAYSports.

"It's great to have it all wrapped up so quickly and far in advance," Earnhardt said. "Rick and I were on the same page from the first time we talked about it, so there wasn't any sense in waiting. There were never any questions or hesitations from either of us. It was just, 'Yeah, let's do it.'

"I'm really happy at Hendrick Motorsports and enjoy working with everyone here. The team's been very competitive this season, and we're all excited about the direction of things. I want to make sure we're giving our fans something to cheer about for a long time."

Earnhardt Jr. spent his first eight Cup seasons with Dale Earnhardt Inc., the team founded by his late father. He signed with Hendrick in June 2007 and joined the team in 2008.