DOVER, Del. — Clint Bowyer sponsor 5-Hour Energy announced Friday that it would return next season as a sponsor of Bowyer and Michael Waltrip Racing.

The company, which is a popular energy drink maker, is in its second year of a three-year deal through 2014 to sponsor Bowyer for 24 races each season.

In 2012, the company expanded that commitment to nearly the full season and then kept it at the original 24-race plan in 2013. Its commitment for 2014 came into question following the recent integrity controversy embroiling MWR, sparking 5-Hour Energy officials to say they would wait until the end of the year before making a decision.

MORE: Chase favorites and Dover picks | Three-team Chase race? | Harvick's weird season

If 5-Hour Energy had dropped MWR, it could have put the team into a financial crisis. It already is trying to figure out what to do with its No. 56 team and Martin Truex Jr., as sponsor NAPA has announced it would leave the team after this season.

"There are scores of passionate fans, numerous charitable organizations, and hundreds of hard-working MWR employees and their families who are directly impacted by 5-Hour Energy's NASCAR sponsorship," 5-Hour Energy communications director Melissa Skabich said in a statement Friday.

"After several internal discussions and meetings with MWR, we are prepared to announce our decision ahead of schedule. 5-Hour Energy will be back as a sponsor of MWR and Clint Bowyer for 2014. We look forward to another great year of competitive racing."

The company had been non-committal for 2014 after Bowyer spun with seven laps remaining in the Sept. 7 race at Richmond International Raceway.

That spin set off a chain of events that resulted in MWR being penalized for manipulating the finish of the race and altered who got into the Chase for the Sprint Cup.

Bowyer escaped without much of an actual points penalty (he was docked 50 points pre-Chase, which then was wiped away when the Chase standings reset). But Bowyer has taken the brunt of the uproar as most believe he spun intentionally, which he has denied, and for Truex's points penalty resulting in Truex being pulled from the Chase by NASCAR.

Last week, 5-Hour Energy president Scott Henderson questioned NASCAR chairman Brian France's integrity because of France's statement about having the authority to add Jeff Gordon to the Chase for the Sprint Cup.

"There's been a lot of talk about integrity," Henderson said prior to last Sunday's race at New Hampshire Motor Speedway. "When the guy who is in charge can say, 'I can do whatever I want, I'm going to do it and I just did it,' I wonder about integrity.

"I've got to make sure we can win in this sport."