DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. — Three-wide racing during practice Wednesday led to a wild multicar crash at Daytona International Speedway.

The crash resulted in Parker Kligerman's Swan Racing car getting lifted off the ground and flipping upside-down.

Several drivers were racing in a big three-wide pack while practicing for Thursday's Budweiser Duel qualifying races. The crash began when Joey Logano appeared to hit Matt Kenseth — the same two drivers who caused a big crash in Saturday's Sprint Unlimited.

PHOTOS: Must-see images of the wrecks | New paint schemes for Daytona, 2014

The collision between Kenseth and Logano sent Paul Menard's car spinning toward the outside wall, where it hit Kligerman's No. 30 car, lifting it off the ground and damaging the catchfence at Daytona.

Kligerman's car slid on its roof for several hundred feet before coming to a stop.

MORE: Kligerman unfazed by flipping on roof | More wrecks coming

The practice session was cut short while track and NASCAR officials repair the fence. A second Sprint Cup practice is scheduled for 6:30 p.m. today.

A year ago, the catchfence at Daytona was damaged when Kyle Larson's car got airborne and slammed into the fence during the Nationwide Series race. That crash sent car parts and debris flying into the grandstands, injuring more than 30 fans.

The crash Wednesday also sent debris into the grandstands but there were few fans there and no reported injuries, according to Fox.

Logano took partial blame for the crash.

"I guess it was partially my fault, just working too hard there," he said. "I thought (Kenseth) was going to the bottom and he came back up and I was there."

Menard said it looked like Logano caused the crash.

"I just saw the front half of the 20 (Kenseth) getting squirrely," Menard said. "Someone got into him. Joey was trying to bump-draft. Luckily no one got hurt. It could have been much worse."

Kenseth said Logano got into the back of him.

"We just lost a lot of speed, the 22 got right on me and I moved to the left and he clipped my right rear," Kenseth said. "He had to slow down after that and that seemd to trigger the wreck."

Kligerman, who was uninjured, was not happy with Logano.

"It looked like the 22 was just being overly aggressive," Kligerman said. "I want to talk to him about it. Paul and I had the same opinion there, just what are you doing, why are you side-drafting and bumping people in the first drafting practice we’ve done all week? I was backing out of the draft right there and was trying to get out of it."

"That’s a big wreck for practice," said rookie Ryan Truex, who also was involved.

Cole Whitt and Brian Vickers were involved in an earlier crash during the practice session when a piece of debris damaged the front of the car and Whitt slammed the wall, collecting Vickers. Vickers will have to go to backup cars for Thursday's qualifying races. Logano, Kligerman, Menard and Ryan Truex will have to go to backups after the big crash.

— Bob Pockrass contributed to this story.