Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

KOTA KINABALU: The City Hall concert on December 31 to usher in New Year 2015, has been cancelled.

Its public relations officer, Syron A. Tunggolou in a statement yesterday said the cancellation was to respect Malaysians who had been displaced by floods.

Also cancelled is the carnival bazaar in conjunction with the New Year eve’s concert although the events at Lintasan Desoaka such as the ‘KK City Healthy Fun Ride’ scheduled for December 30 from 2pm to 5pm and the launching of ‘My Buskers Corner’ on December 31 at 9am will be on.

Syron added that the anti-narcotics exhibition, free health screening, car park service counter and the ‘Waste to Wealth’ exhibition would be open to the public from 8.30am to 4.30pm on December 31.

The ‘Funland’ and ‘6D Cinema’ booths will be in operation on December 30 and 31, she said and reminded road users that Jalan Bandaran and Jalan Perpustakaan would be closed from 1.30pm to 5pm on December 30 to make way for the ‘KK City Healthy Fun Ride’ event.

“On December 31, the two roads will be closed from 7am to 12.30pm for the launching of My Buskers Corner,” she added.

The federal government has also cancelled the national-level Christmas and New Year celebrations in light of the floods in seven states.

Federal Territories Minister Datuk Seri Tengku Adnan Tengku Mansor announced last Thursday that the Ambang Tahun Baru, to be held at Putrajaya on December 31, would be cancelled amid growing concerns over the plight of the flood victims.

Tengku Adnan said he was in talks with the event sponsor, Ambank Group, on whether the RM3 million to be spent for the annual New Year celebration could, instead, be used for flood relief.

The Tourism and Culture Ministry said the Christmas Open House, scheduled to be held at Pavilion tonight would not be held as planned.

New Year’s festivities have also been cancelled in Selangor, Terengganu, Pahang and Perak.

The Sultan of Perak, Nazrin Muizzuddin Shah, had on Thursday instructed all state departments and agencies to cancel New Year celebrations, including concerts and countdowns, and called on Muslims to hold solat hajat prayers, instead.