Kit Siang fumes over a report about Najib playing golf with Obama as floods ravage the East Coast.

GELANG PATAH: DAP has urged Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak to cut short his holiday in Hawaii and declare a state of emergency as severe floods continue to ravage the East Coast.

In a statement issued here yesterday, DAP strongman Lim Kit Siang denounced Najib for what he said was an attempt to keep his vacation secret and decried the government’s apparent lack of concern for the situation in Kelantan, the state that is hardest hit by the flooding.

Referring to a Washington Post report of Najib playing golf with US President Barack Obama on Christmas eve, he said it “caused quite a jolt, not because he was holidaying in Oahu, Hawaii, but because he had tried to keep his trip abroad a secret from Malaysians”.

He said: “This jolt was compounded by Najib’s absence at a time when the country is facing its worst floods since 1971, with over 91,000 people affected in Kelantan, Terengganu, Pahang, Perak, Perlis.”

Lim warned that floods were already beginning in Kedah and expected to hit Johore in a “massive manner” in a matter of days.

He also criticised Deputy Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin for his response to mounting criticism of Najib for his absence from the country. Muhyiddin had said “I am in charge. Don’t worry. Have trust in me.” Lim said that statement reflected his “insufferable complacency”.

“Malaysian have reason to worry that Muhyiddin is up to the task of handling the nation’s worst floods since 1971, with his stubborn refusal to agree to the need to declare an emergency to focus all Federal Government resources to deal with the devastation,” he said.

Referring to a blog posting by Najib, in which he said “we will do everything to help flood victims,” Lim said the statement had failed to convince Malaysians of his sincerity because “he is not prepared to cut short his vacation to rush back to the country to personally take charge of Federal Government efforts.”

He added: “Malaysians are entitled to ask why there seems to be no Federal Government in Putrajaya, why the PM is away on a secret holiday, and why not a single Umno minister is visiting hardest-hit Kelantan to show the Federal Government’s concern.

“It is not that the Federal Government has been taken by surprise as the authorities had warned those on the East Coast to brace themselves for the worst floods in recent history as a result of a powerful combination of king tides and strong winds.

“If communities in coastal areas and along river mouths have been warned to ready themselves for immediate grab-and-go evacuations, where have all the Umno ministers disappeared to, in particular the minister in charge of national disasters?

“Najib should not dilly-dally but declare an emergency because of the floods and cut short his Hawaii holiday to rush back to take charge.”