KUALA LUMPUR, Dec 23, 2014:

The floods affecting Peninsular Malaysia rose to alarming rates today following continuous rain fall.

Perak state has also been heavily affected, with water levels rising today.

According to the Department of Irrigation and Drainage Malaysia, water levels at Tasik Temengor, Hulu Perak, have reached the “alert” level measuring 247.69m.

Sg Selama in Gua Petain, Selama, also measured water levels above the normal level at 14.86m.

DAP national vice-chairman and Ipoh Barat MP M. Kula Segaran earlier tweeted that parts of Tasek, Ipoh, were hit by floods after continuous rain for three days.

“Also monsoon drains adjoining houses clogged.”

Twitter user Nurul Ain posted a picture saying water had entered the arena square in Kuala Kangsar, while another user with the twithandle @evlealia said the water level at the arena had reached waist level.

On the Adun BN Perak Facebook page, it was said that Kampung Labit in Lenggong was among the worst areas affected by floods.

“At least 21 houses in the area are inundated with flood waters, leading to the evacuation of the residents to temporary relief centres,” the posting said.

The page had also shared several pictures by Lintang assemblyman Datuk Mohd Zolkafly Harun showing the flood situation in Sungai Siput today, with Kampung Lasah and Kampung Pulau Mentimun being the worst affected.

Meanwhile, water levels at Gua Musang, Kelantan, have increased to 89.25m as at 9pm tonight, prompting authorities to classify the situation as hitting “dangerous” levels.

On the Kelantan MCA Facebook page, several pictures were uploaded showing the flood situation in Gua Musang, which was described as really bad.

Water levels in Maran, Pahang, have also risen to alarming levels, reaching a height of 22.13m as of 9pm.

Kuala Krai, Kelantan, has also recorded water levels at a dangerous level. However, authorities have not indicated the measurement of water levels.

As of 8pm, water levels at Besut, Terengganu, have reached up to 18.73m, exceeding cautionary levels.

In the Dungun district of Terengganu, water has reached up to 13.87m, also exceeding dangerous levels, while Setiu measured water levels of 8.31m.

In Kuantan, Pahang, residents have been cautioned as water levels have reached 21.38m, whereas Pekan measured water levels of 3.19m.