GEORGE TOWN: Taiwan Buddhist Tzu Chi Foundation founder Dharma Master Cheng Yan has donated RM350,000 worth of vegetarian instant rice to the flood victims. Buddhist Tzu Chi Merits Society Malaysia Commissioner Khoo Boo Leong said 120,000 packets of the rice reached Penang yesterday before they were transported to Kota Baru.

The instant rice is easy to cook, even with cold drinking water. “It will turn out like normal rice after 45 minutes,” he said at the Penang International Airport cargo terminal yesterday.

He said Forecom Phase to Phase, a logistics company, provided the transport between Penang and Kelantan and Fastr@ck Global Logistics secured tax exemption for the flood relief items. “Otherwise, it will cost us more than RM100,000 in taxes,” he said.

He said they had given RM500 to each family with fewer than six members and RM800 to each family with seven members and more. Those who wish to donate can call 04-228 1013 or visit www.tzuchi.org.my or e-mail at ­donation@tzuchi.org.my.

Japan offers RM500,000 in aid

PETALING JAYA: Japan has offered more than RM500,000 worth of emergency relief aid and equipment to help Malaysia’s flood victims. Expressing sympathy towards the flood victims, the Japanese government said it was also deeply concerned about their plight.

“Out of the experiences of disasters in our own country, Japan realises the urgent need to assist the government and the people of Malaysia in their difficult tasks and undertakings of rescuing the victims,” said a statement issued by the Japanese Embassy in Kuala Lumpur yesterday.

The statement added that the assistance, in the form of generators, water purifiers and other humanitarian goods, will be channelled through the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).

Ministry mulls schools clean-up



KOTA BARU: The Education Ministry will give serious attention to cleaning up schools affected by the floods so that the new schooling session on Jan 11 and 12 will commence without problems.

Second Education Minister Datuk Seri Idris Jusoh said the ministry was confident that all cleaning work and replacement of desks and chairs could be carried out within this week.

“There are probably several schools affected. That is why we deferred the reopening of the schooling session,” he said after visiting Universiti Malaysia Kelantan here. The university students and staff were busy cleaning the campus and the surrounding areas after the floods last week. — Bernama