GENERAL › NEWS

NGOs Chip In Their Contribution To Help Flood Victims

KUALA LUMPUR, Dec 24 (Bernama) -- Several non-governmental organisations (NGOs) have chipped in to help flood victims in the east coast since last week.



Malaysian Youth Council (MYC) vice president Wan Salwati Abdullah said three teams along with 120 volunteers will leave for Kelantan, Terengganu and Pahang today to help flood victims there, with another 700 to 800 more to follow tomorrow night.



"At first, we had planned to provide post flood assistance, but looking at the worsening conditions, we have decided to help the relief centres. We are also prepared to send volunteers to other states in the north if the flood situation worsened," she told Bernama today, adding that they had also prepared aid in the form of food and clothes for the victims.



Malaysian Red Crescent Society (MRSC) executive secretary Nor Aziah Budin told Bernama that two teams from the headquarters had been sent to Kelantan to help volunteers on duty in the state divisions, along with supplies such as blankets, rice porridge, instant noodles, vitamins, stationery, cooking utensils and hygiene kits.



"As of now, there are approximately 120 individuals comprising MRSC staff and volunteers in Kelantan. Other teams are also preparing themselves at the headquarters and they will be ready to move to wherever the flood situation worsens," she said.



Angkatan Belia Islam Malaysia (Abim) 2014 Flood Relief Mission squad assistant coordinator Maria Kamel said, besides its operation centres in the respective states which have been active since early this week, teams from Abim headquarters would also be sent to provide aid to Kelantan and Terengganu, in the form of basic supplies worth around RM10,000.



"It is still very little compared to what the victims need. We urge the public to contribute towards helping these flood victims," she said.



Meanwhile, the Crisis Relief Squad of MCA (CRSM) will be deploying its manpower and resources to help flood victims and provide crisis relief.



MCA Deputy President Datuk Dr Wee Ka Siong said in a statement that CRSM would also be setting up an 'East Coast Flood Relief Fund' to enable the public to contribute to flood victims.



Interested donors can contact 03-2203 3739/78/71 or visit CRSM Facebook Page at 'CRSM HQ CRSM'.



-- BERNAMA