Beaufort, Kudat hit by floods

Published on: Wednesday, December 24, 2014

BEAUFORT: Some 300 people involving 111 families (as at 5pm) were relocated to a relief centre at Dewan Datuk Seri Panglima Mohd Dun following the floods since Monday afternoon.

Natural Disaster District Committee Chairman-cum-Beaufort District Officer, Shaid Othman (pic), said seven villages were affected due to incessant rain and that the water level at Sungai Padas is above the danger mark.

"Among villages affected include Kg Bekalau, Bingkul, Cina, Mempagar, Melulugus, Luagan, Lubak and Jempangah in which Kg Bekalau was the worst hit. About 292 flood victims involving 111 families have been rescued and relocated to the centre.

"More villages may be affected if the level of Sungai Padas continues to rise," he said, when met at the flood operation centre, Tuesday. At the moment, only one relief centre is open to accommodate the victims but seven are on standby.

Most of the district's township had submerged and several main roads had to be closed. Shaid reminded those staying in flood prone areas to evacuate and contact 087-211666 for assistance and to bring along their documents.

He said enforcement agencies like police, fire and rescue personnel and Civil Defence Department personnel, among others, are ready to be mobilised and rescue victims if the Sungai Padas water level continues to rise.

It was the fourth time that Beaufort has been hit by floods this year. The first was in February, then in May and third in November.

Meanwhile, nine families involving 63 people in Kg Bak-Bak, Kudat, were affected by the floods on Tuesday. Fire and Rescue Department Public Relation Officer Mohd Affendy K. Ramin said victims have so far sought shelter at relatives' and neighbours' houses.

Acting Kudat police chief ASO Juriaman Tiur said the flood situation in the district did not reach alarming level as the water level at Sungai Kurina in Sikuati showed a warning reading of 1.7-metre of which 2.2 is the danger level.

Also, the water level at Sg Milau in Matunggong is at 3.2-metre, the danger level. Juriaman said all main roads in the district are passable. He reminded those living in flood prone areas and riverbanks to contact police or the fire and rescue station if they need assistance.

In TENOM, only one of the 11 flood relief centres here is still operational as water levels receded and most villagers are allowed to return home.

As of 3pm, the water level at Sungai Padas here has reduced to 177.03 metres, which still breaches the 177m danger level mark, said district officer Madiyem Layapan.

To date, Naluyan Cultural House is still housing 19 victims from three families.

CAPTION: A major part of Beaufort township that lay submerged.