Below, find the latest update on post Hurricane Irma relief efforts, as made available by the government’s Emergency Operations Center late Friday morning:

The American Red Cross has established a helpline to aid with family reunification. The toll-free number is 1-800-RED-CROSS or 1-800-733-2767. To speak to an operator, choose option (1).

At a briefing by the Emergency Operations Center, federal and local agencies were advised that the Cyril E. King airport in St. Thomas is being prepared to accept military shipments of relief supplies and personnel later today. It is among the top priorities of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the local government to open the air bridge that would support the needs of hurricane victims on St. Thomas, St. John and Water Island. The Water and Power Authority continues working to restore electricity at the airport.

Another priority in the relief effort is to restore ferry boat and cargo service linking St. Thomas and St. John. The U.S. Coast Guard reports this morning, that after an assessment of the waterways, the Captain of the Port is preparing to allow daylight ferry service, but with extreme caution. The Coast Guard also is determining whether required buoys remain in place before authorizing commercial shipping to resume in the port of Charlotte Amalie. That could happen later today. St. John has been largely isolated since Hurricane Irma struck on September 6.

Search and rescue teams are deploying on both islands to locate victims as well as to assess needs, damage and hazards. Some are focusing today on the densely populated area of Tutu, St. Thomas, where damage is widespread. Hampering rescue and relief efforts are sections of roads which have not yet been cleared, and understaffed local responding agencies, due to the number of people unable to report to work.

St. John’s Myrah Keating Smith Health Clinic has a limited supply of fuel for its generator. The condition of emergency shelters on that island is unclear because of damaged communications lines. With high demand for shelter space, due to the widespread destruction in the district, there are aggressive efforts underway to keep shelters supplied with food, water and electricity. The pending opening of the ports today will make possible major relief to the affected population. In anticipation of initial shipments of commodities and personnel, points of distribution on St. Thomas, St. John and Water Island are being established.

Security on St. Thomas and St. John will be strengthened today with the expected deployment of Virgin Islands National Guard troops and police officers from St. Croix. They will join in enforcing curfews and responding to calls for assistance.

Temporary medical facilities remain a priority. Relocation of hospital patients from St. Thomas to other facilities has been completed successfully.

Residents are urged to observe the curfew in effect for St. Thomas and St. John and to shelter in place.

Feature Image: (Sept. 7, 2017, Naval Aircrewman (Helicopter) 2nd Class John Malico and Aircrewman (Rescue Swimmer) 1st Class Erick Sotelo, both assigned to Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron (HSC) 22, help a mother and child during the U.S. Navy relief efforts in the U.S. Virgin Islands following Hurricane Irma. The DoD is supporting FEMA, the lead federal agency, in helping those affected by Hurricane Irma to minimize suffering and is one component of the overall whole-of-government response effort. (U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Nathan Wilkes/Released) September 7, 2017.