As Hurricane Irma bears down on the Caribbean and Florida, the governors of the Carolinas have declared states of emergency.

Gov. Roy Cooper on Wednesday declared a state of emergency, which will go into effect at 8 a.m. Thursday. Cooper said the state is considering possible impacts to all 100 counties across the state.

“It is not too soon to get ready,” Cooper said. “Irma is a powerful storm.”

Never miss a local story. Sign up today for a free 30 day free trial of unlimited digital access. SUBSCRIBE NOW

SHARE COPY LINK Some small Caribbean islands bore a full hit from Hurricane Irma on Wednesday. Powerful winds and heavy rain swept through the former independent former Dutch colony of St Maarten, taking out a local webcam. PTZtv WEBCAM

Powerful Category 5 Hurricane Irma already was pushing into the Caribbean and approaching Florida on Wednesday when it was joined in the Atlantic by two newly formed hurricanes – Jose and Katia. Jose formed well to the east of Irma and was not expected to pose an immediate threat to land, though it’s too early to accurately predict the storm’s path. Katia formed in the gulf, off the coast of Mexico.

SHARE COPY LINK As of 11 am Wednesday, Hurricane Irma's track looks a lot like Hugo in 1989 when that category 5 storm ripped through the Carolinas, causing major destruction in Charleston and into the Piedmont and mountains of North Carolina. This video shows Hu NWS

South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster also announced a state of emergency for his state Wednesday.

North Carolina is still several days away from feeling the effects of Irma, but could begin to feel wind from the storm Sunday and could see rough surf and beach erosion as early as Thursday.

Cooper urged residents across the state to think about possible routes and destinations for evacuation if it becomes necessary. He stressed that emergency supplies such as water, non-perishable food, phones, chargers, flashlights, batteries, blankets and sleeping bags should be checked and restocked. Updated information can be found at readync.org throughout the storm.

SHARE COPY LINK The crew of a WP-3D Orion fly into the eye of Hurricane Irma Tuesday evening to study the strengthening Category 5 storm. For flights through a hurricane, it is a three person team in the cockpit. The pilot in the left seat (closest to the camera) LT Rob Mitchell/NOAA

“It’s time to get your family, your pets and your businesses ready for Irma,” the governor said.

Cooper added that many North Carolinians still lack a permanent home after being displaced by Hurricane Matthew last year, and they will need to be cared for. The state recently sent five swift-water rescue teams and two N.C. National Guard helicopter teams to assist with Hurricane Harvey in Texas, but Cooper said they will return by Wednesday night.