Oh, those magical handheld phone-calling, text-making, music-listening, picture-taking, game-playing, news-reading, answer-giving devices.

They do so much for us and we’ve grown to rely on them always being there, waiting to serve as long as we keep them charged and don’t drop them.

As Hurricane Irma approached Florida last weekend, we kept our smartphones plugged into their chargers, knowing they’d be full of juice if we lost power.

But as hurricane-force winds howled outside, many of us discovered the magic was gone.

Suddenly, customers experienced web pages loading slowly, video not working, and attempts to make calls greeted with recordings saying all circuits are busy.

As electricity stopped flowing, cell towers started dropping off of the network, slowing communications across the state.

By Monday, nearly half — 1,493 — of the 3,085 cell towers in the tri-county region were inoperable, according to status reports released by the Federal Communications Commission, including 443 of 924 towers in Broward County, 311 of 726 towers in Palm Beach County and 739 of 1,435 towers in Miami-Dade County.

CourtesyT Satellite-connected cell tower provided by AT&T to help Key West recover from Hurricane Irma Satellite-connected cell tower provided by AT&T to help Key West recover from Hurricane Irma (CourtesyT)

Hardest-hit counties lost larger percentages, including Monroe (81 percent), Lee (54 percent), Hendry (67 percent) and Highlands (53 percent).

Statewide, 3,973 of 14,502 cell towers — 27 percent — were down at the exact time consumers were relying on them most.

Wednesday on Facebook, Lake Worth resident Jessica Lukens groused, “Very disappointed that we have lost service due to Hurricane Irma in Florida. Our phones, data and tablets are all down. … VERY annoyed we pay for 4 lines, 2 tablets and the plug-in for our car and lost everything.”

But as the week stretched on and electricity was gradually restored to the region, cell towers came back online as well. By Friday, just 9 percent of towers remained out of service statewide, including 14 percent in Broward County, 12 percent in Palm Beach County and 16 percent in Miami-Dade County, according to the FCC.

In the meantime, cell phone companies brought temporary communications equipment to hard-hit areas with severe power outages.

AT&T set up nine portable cell sites in the state, including six in the Keys. Verizon, which said 97 percent of its Florida facilities have been restored, sent two satellite-connected stand-alone cell sites to the Keys and another to Naples.

Verizon set up generator-powered communications centers in Naples to enable residents to charge their phones and tablets and make outside calls.

Sprint said it too deployed portable satellite and cell transmitters to keep services online.

“These actions paid off as we were able to provide customers with wireless service in many communities across the region after Irma,” spokeswoman Roni Singleton said.

Contacted late in the week after Irma, the four leading wireless service providers declined to provide specific information about what went wrong, what could have been done to prevent more cell tower outages, and what might need to be corrected to prevent so many outages in the future.

AT&T spokeswoman Kelly Starling said her company will explore Irma’s lessons later.

“A key focus for us in our ongoing post-event process is to identify lessons learned from our experience and from others during each event,” she said. “We will do the same with Irma, once our restoration process is completed.”

T-Mobile spokeswoman Stacey DiNuzzo said despite efforts to ensure availability of backup power at cell tower sites, networks are at the mercy of the power grid.

“Power outages really are at the heart of what services go down and how quickly they can be brought back up,” DiNuzzo said. “Without power, no telecommunications can stay online for long [battery backups are not long-term solutions.]

Singleton said that wireless carriers depend on commercial power providers and hardwired network services. “While back-up batteries and generators can keep a cell site running for additional hours and even a couple of days, the ongoing loss of commercial power and local wireline service can result in a disruption of service,” she said.

“Additionally, excessive flooding and downed trees can impede the ability of crews to safely access some of those impacted sites.”

DiNuzzo noted that despite widespread flooding caused by Hurricane Harvey in the Houston area, power was maintained in almost all areas. “Because of that, there was very little impact to wireless services.”

All four of the leading providers, while not announcing refunds for the days cell service was spotty, nevertheless said they were waiving various charges during the recovery period:

Sprint waived overage fees for calls, texts, and data for its Florida customers between Sept. 9 and Sept. 15 and will continue to waive them for Keys residents through Sept. 22

AT&T waived overage charges for subscribers without unlimited calls, texts or data between Sept. 8 and Sept. 17 and extended payment dates for prepaid customers with voice and texts. Also,AT&T is waiving or adjusting late payment charges for wireless, home internet, voice and video service customers in bills generated between Sept. 8 and Nov. 8.

Verizon Wireless lifted caps on data, texts and calls between Sept. 9 and Sept. 15 for post-paid Florida customers and provided 3 free gigabytes of bonus data for prepaid customers.

T-Mobile is offering unlimited calls, texts and data for impacted Florida customers not on the T-Mobile ONE [unlimited] plan, through Sept. 24.

rhurtibise@sun-sentinel.com, 954-356-4071, twitter: twitter.com/ronhurtibise