HURRICANE BILL TO EXCEED $231 MILLION Dr. Virginia Clerveaux, Director of the Department of Disaster Management and Emergencies (DDME) T urks and Caicos Islands' cost to repair the damages caused by hurricanes Irma and Maria will exceed the $231million spent after hurricane Ike in 2008, says Dr. Virginia Clerveaux, Director of the Department of Disaster Management and Emergencies (DDME).



“While the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) damage and loss report for the TCI is not completed, given the scale of destruction in the worst hit islands, it is fair to say that total repair cost will be significant and it will be high,” she told The SUN. “I would not be surprised if it’s not higher than hurricane Ike’s. In 2008 hurricane Ike total damage was $213.6 million and in that year hurricane Ike had mainly impacted Grand Turk, South Caicos and Salt Cay. We’re now seeing a situation where all of the islands were impacted including some of our cays.”



She also said the estimated cost to repair schools and government offices in the Turks and Caicos Islands will be over $11 million.

“In the case of critical facilities 95% of government schools sustained damage, resulting in children being displaced in regular classes and relocating to gymnasium, church facilities and youth centers. Approximately 70% of government offices also suffered damages and it is estimated that it will cost the government over $11 million to repair or rebuild schools and offices that were impacted,” she explained



“In terms of facilities, approximately 74% of critical infrastructure and facilities within the TCI were impacted. These included electricity, water distribution, telecommunication network, hospitals, schools and Government offices,” She added.



Clerveaux noted that nearly $7 million of the repair cost will be accounted by or for, by schools for structures and contents and the amount is expected to increase even further.



Hurricane Irma a category 5 storm, the largest ever to form in the Atlantic Ocean made landfall in the Turks and Caicos Islands on Thursday September 7th, 2017 and passed between 32 – 36 miles south of the chain of Islands, which resulted in the Islands experiencing the right side which is the stronger side of Irma.



Following the passage of Irma the entire TCI experienced a system wide power outage in the Islands of South Caicos, Grand Turk, Providenciales and Salt Cay the number of electricity transmission poles that were down or damaged ranged from 250-500 transmission poles which represented 65% -90% of the respective islands. Providenciales had 65% of its pools being down, North and Middle Caicos had 35%, South Caicos had 80%, Grand Turk had 90% and Salt Cay had 65%.”



“The failure of the telecommunication system was one of the most significant impacts of hurricane Irma. The TCI experienced total communication failure across the Islands chains for both mobile coverage and fixed lines and approximately 92% of mobile network and 75% of fixed access nodes were partly or totally damaged which affected these communication challenges, which affected the overall coordination of response activities of day to day communication throughout the TCI. However the Government and various agencies had redundancy built in their whole communication system,” she explained.



Clerveaux noted that there were a lot of lessons learnt and the telecommunication companies and Government will ensure that the next hurricane that hits TCI, communications will be able to stand up better.



The TCI also experienced coastal impact as a result of the passage of these two storms and like many other Caribbean countries the economy of the TCI is heavily depending on tourism. This sector accounts for about approximately 40% of GDP product. 70% of all beaches including the world renowned beach experienced high level of erosion; it is also true that while some beaches were experiencing degradation, in other areas the beaches actually increased.



Hotels were also impacted through the Turks and Caicos Islands, which reduced the number of persons that were employed, persons that were unemployed and under employed. Also the fishery sector was also impacted.



Hurricane Irma resulted in wide spread catastrophic damage in the TCI, leaving no Island or Cay untouched. The worst affected Islands are: Salt Cay, South Caicos, Providenciales and Grand Turk. Two weeks after the impact of this storm while still grappling with the early recovery stage, the TCI once again had to move into response mode for another major storm. Hurricane Maria followed the exact path of hurricane Irma, hurricane Maria made landfall in the TCI passing between 35-100 miles of the Islands as a category 3 storm on September 21st, 2017,” Clerveaux stated to the SUN.



“Needless to say the passage of Maria in such close proximity to the TCI further aggravated and complicated the efforts to recover from Irma while creating new challenges of its own. Unlike Irma Maria was a rain maker with storm serve up to six feet.”



Before 2008 the last major storm to have impacted the TCI was hurricane Donna in 1960, which marked 48 years of no major storms impacting the TCI. Between 2008-2017 in less than ten years the TCI has been directly or indirectly impacted by approximately 10 storms.



The frequency of impact coupled with the size of the storms speaks to the vulnerability of the TCI as a result of its location within the hurricane belt and changing climatic conditions.



Clerveaux said the initial damage assessment by Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) reviled that approximately 80% of all residences that were surveyed received some level of damage.



Likewise post damage and needs assessment revealed that female headed households which are among the most venerable accounted for 40% of all households that were impacted and 14% of total houses that were damaged had home insurance that covered disaster risks. Nearly 100% of homes in Salt Cay and South Caicos were impacted and 79% of those in Providenciales and Grand Turk according to the survey that was surveyed sustained damage from the passage of both Irma and Maria. Over 400 houses were totally destroyed and more than 700 houses sustained significant damage to the point of being inhabitable in some cases. In south Caicos 22% of the homes were totally destroyed, Grand Turk had four percent and Providenciales had seven percent that we totally destroyed. A few weeks ago we still had persons living in shelters.”



submit your comments



