As Hurricane Irma is tracking its way through the Atlantic Ocean with a projected weekend landfall in Florida, schools are adjusting their Week 2 college schedules to allow fans and students to prepare for the storm. As schools make announcements, we'll update this post with the latest for each of the FBS programs in the projected path of the hurricane.

Miami: The Hurricanes' road game at Arkansas State has been canceled with no plans to make up the contest as the teams do not share an off week later in the season. The University of Miami has canceled classes for the rest of the week, and Mark Richt has released his players to seek safety from the storm.

Florida: The school announced Thursday that Saturday's home-opener against Northern Colorado has been cancelled after previously being moved up to noon ET. "We have been in constant communication this week with university and government officials," said Florida athletic director Scott Stricklin. "As the Hurricane's track has approached the state of Florida, it's become obvious that playing a football game is not the right thing to do. The focus of our state and region needs to be on evacuations and relief efforts. There is a tremendous amount of stress currently on the roads of this state, and the availability of gas, water and other supplies are at critical levels. Playing a college football game Saturday would only add to that stress."

Florida State: After initially adjusting the kickoff time for the Seminoles' home opener against Louisiana-Monroe from 7 p.m. ET to 12:15 p.m. ET on Saturday, the school announced late Thursday that all athletic events -- including the football game -- have been canceled.

FIU: It was announced Wednesday that FIU's game against Alcorn State will be moved to Birmingham, Alabama. The game will be played on Friday at 7 p.m.

UCF: The Knights were originally scheduled to play Memphis this weekend, but the game has been canceled less than 24 hours to kickoff, according to the Orlando Sentinel. The game was originally moved from Saturday to Friday night at 6:30 p.m. ET, but as the storm draws closer, officials determined to allow people to get prepared.

"Out of an abundance of caution, we agree that the game should not be played on Friday," UCF athletics director Danny White and Memphis athletics director Tom Bowen said in a joint statement. "We agree with Gov. [Rick] Scott that preparation for Hurricane Irma should be the top priority for the state. While our fans will no doubt be disappointed, we know they understand that safety has to come first.

South Florida: After previously moving the game up to 10:30 a.m., both USF and UConn have announced that Saturday's American Athletic Conference opener for both teams will not be played on Saturday. There is no word as to whether the game will be made up or not, only that it "will not be played" on Saturday as scheduled.

USF at UConn will not be played due to Hurricane #Irma 's threat to state of Florida & safe travel.



➡️ https://t.co/ITmSlDrNvI pic.twitter.com/Wcllgr1VEh — USF Football (@USFFootball) September 7, 2017

FAU: At this time, the Owls road game at Wisconsin will still be played Saturday at noon ET.