Loading.... Now Playing: Georgia Up Next: Irma Making it's Way NW Meteorologist Domenica Davis looks at the latest forecast for Hurricane Irma.  IRMA PUMMELS FLORIDA, S. GEORGIA

Big Cities Still in Irma's Path

SE Forecast: Potential Tornadoes, Tropical Storm Warnings

Irma Turns Deadly in Florida

Inside Hurricane Irma's Rabid Eyewall

Aerial View of Irma's Trail of Ruin

Watch: Cantore Battles Irma's Eyewall

Debris Flying in Extreme Wind

Where's the Water in Tampa?

What Miami Looks Like Right Now

Tampa Bay Disappears

WATCH: Irma Makes Second Landfall

Irma Annihilates Roof in Miami

This Is the Most Dangerous Part of Hurricane

Dramatic Boat Rescue During Irma

1st Time Two Cat. 4 Hurricanes Hit U.S. in Same Year

When Power Fails, Do This

Huge Wave Knocks Over Irma Spectator

Massive Irma Seen from Air During Flyover

See Three Hurricanes at Once from Space

View of Hurricane is Unbelievable

They Know How Bad It Can Get

Pleas for Help in Irma's Wake

Is There Such a Thing as a Cat. 6 Hurricane?

Watch Conditions Deteriorate in St. Thomas

Fake Irma Video Explodes Online

Living Through the Caribbean Hurricanes

Looking Inside Irma's Eyewall in St. Maarten

Into the Eye: Eerily Calm in Cat. 5 Monster

In Irma's Cone? What It Really Means

What Do Spaghetti Plots Show Us?

Scary History of the 'I' Hurricane

Irma Forecast to Turn, 1 Reason Why

Don't Get Caught WIthout a Hurricane Plan

Storm Surge Dangers

If a Hurricane Hits, Have These Things Handy

Hurricane Andrew: Remembering the Disaster

Back-to-Back Cat. 5 Landfalls Historic

Has a Hurricane Ever Crossed the Equator?

The Weirdest Hurricane Tracks

Indirect Killers in Hurricanes

The Most Destructive Part of a Hurricane

Landfalling Hurricanes: Where Do They Begin?

Hurricane Winds Speeds and Categories

How Tropical Systems Get Their Names

The Inner Workings of a Hurricane

The Most Extreme We've Seen on Satellite

Inland Precautions for Hurricane Season

Hurricanes are Heat Engines

Gadgets for Hurricane Season 

Story Highlights Irma may be weakening inland, but its impacts will still be significant. Damaging winds will spread into parts of the Southeast from Alabama and Tennessee to Georgia and the Carolinas through late Monday. Coastal flooding will peak Monday in South Carolina, Georgia, and northeast Florida. Rainfall flooding will also be a threat from South Carolina to northeast Florida.

Hurricane Irma's damaging winds, flooding rain, and tornado threats are spreading north into Georgia and the Carolinas, while continuing to lash parts of Florida, even as Irma's peak winds slowly subside.

(FULL COVERAGE OF IRMA: Hurricane Central)

Irma's Latest Status, Conditions

The center of Irma is located about 35 miles east-southeast of Cedar Key, Florida, and is moving north-northwest at 15 to 20 mph.

Among the hardest-hit areas right now is the Jacksonville metro. Winds have gusted from 80 to 90 mph at both Jacksonville International Airport and Mayport, downing multiple trees at the National Weather Service office.

The biggest concern, however, is currently flooding. The NWS issued a flash flood emergency for downtown Jacksonville, including San Marco, South Hampton, Landon Park and Riverside for the concern that winds switching direction once Irma moves north of the area will drive a water rise of another 1 to 2 feet in these areas.

A storm surge of 3 feet has been measured along the St. Johns River at the Interstate 295 bridge. An almost 5.5 foot surge, one of the highest measured on the northeast Florida coast, was reported at the NOS tide gauge at Mayport, Florida, early Monday morning.

Storm surge flooding on par with that observed during Hurricane Matthew was also reported in Flagler County at Marineland Acres. Waist-deep water from torrential rain was seen farther south in Palm Coast and in Daytona Beach east of U.S. 1. Water was reported up to car doors on U.S. 17 in Brunswick, Georgia.

Irma's large tropical-storm force wind field, up to 415 miles from the center, had already triggered some tree damage and power outages in south Georgia and the eastern Florida Panhandle.

Winds gusts up to 70 to 80 mph hammered the Orlando metro area early Monday. In the suburb of Pine Hills, residents were rescued early Monday morning when 24 homes were flooded with waist-deep water.

Hurricane and Storm Surge Watches and Warnings

A storm surge warning continues from the South Santee River southward to the Jupiter Inlet, and on the peninsula from Cape Sable to the Ochlockonee River, including Tampa Bay.

Hurricane warnings extend north of Sebastian Inlet on the east coast to Fernandina Beach and from the Anclote River to Indian Pass on the Gulf Coast. Hurricane warnings are also in effect over much of interior north and central Florida, and a few counties in south Georgia. Included in the hurricane warnings are the Tampa/St. Petersburg metro, Orlando, Jacksonville, Tallahassee, Thomasville and Valdosta.

Hurricane warnings mean hurricane conditions are either occurring or expected to occur within 36 hours.

A hurricane watch is also in effect for the Georgia coast northward to Edisto Beach, South Carolina. A watch means hurricane conditions are possible within 48 hours.

Tropical storm warnings have now been dropped for most of south Florida and the Keys, but remain in effect from near Ft. Myers to the Okaloosa/Walton County line, from Jupiter Inlet to Sebastian Inlet and along the Georgia and South Carolina coasts to just north of Charleston.

These tropical storm warnings also extend well inland to include much of Georgia, eastern Alabama, and parts of southern South Carolina, including the cities of Atlanta and Montgomery, Alabama.





South Florida Forecast, Impacts

Storm surge flooding may linger through Monday, according to the National Hurricane Center. Here are some potential peak surge levels (expressed as inundation above ground level) going forward, if they occur at high tide:

Cape Sable to Captiva: 2 to 4 feet

Captiva to Anna Maria Island: 3 to 5 feet

North Miami Beach through Cape Sable, including the Florida Keys: 1 to 2 feet

Irma's wind field is large. Hurricane-force winds extend outward up to 80 miles from the center, and tropical-storm-force winds extend outward up to 415 miles. These tropical-storm-force winds will expand eastward across the entire peninsula.

Depending on the exact track of Irma, locations in the hurricane and tropical storm warning areas could see structural damage and scattered to widespread power and communication outages from high winds.

North, Central Florida Forecast, Impacts

Irma's center will track northward out of north Florida later Monday.

Dangerous water-level rises (storm surge) are still possible in north Florida, according to the National Hurricane Center, if they occur at high tide.

Anna Maria Island to Clearwater Beach, including Tampa Bay: 2 to 4 feet

Clearwater Beach to Ochlockonee River: 4 to 6 feet

South Santee Beach in South Carolina south to Fernandina Beach in northeast Florida: 4 to 6 feet

Fernandina Beach to Jupiter Inlet: 3 to 5 feet

Significant inland wind damage and rainfall flooding could occur in parts of north and central Florida, given Irma's large size.

Locally heavy rainfall is expected, with up to 20 inches possible, based on the latest rainfall forecasts from the National Hurricane Center and the Weather Prediction Center:

Northern Florida Peninsula: 3 to 6 additional inches, with storm totals of 8 to 15 inches

Central Florida Panhandle: 2 to 4 additional inches

Georgia, Carolinas Forecast, Impacts

The center of Irma will track into Georgia by Monday afternoon, then into the Tennessee Valley as a weakening system Tuesday.

Dangerous water-level rises (storm surge) of 4 to 6 feet are also possible from South Santee River, South Carolina, to Fernandina Beach, Florida, according to the National Hurricane Center, if they occur at high tide.

Significant inland wind damage and rainfall flooding could occur in parts of Georgia and the Carolinas, as well.

Power outages from tropical storm-force winds are expected to spread as far north as the Tennessee Valley Monday and Monday night,.

Dangerous surf and coastal flooding will likely exist throughout the southeastern U.S. coastline even well away from Irma's center, possibly into Tuesday in some areas.

Coastal flooding already closed a few streets in downtown Charleston, South Carolina, Sunday afternoon.

The National Weather Service in Charleston, South Carolina, said that record tide levels, topping those during Hurricane Matthew, are possible at Ft. Pulaski, Georgia , and storm surge at Charleston Harbor Monday could top that seen from Matthew, exceeded only by Hurricane Hugo in 1989.

Heavy rainfall is expected to spread across the Southeast. Here are the latest rainfall forecasts from the National Hurricane Center and the Weather Prediction Center:

South Georgia: 3 to 6 inches with storm totals from 8 to 15 inches

Middle Georgia, eastern Alabama and southern South Carolina: 3 to 6 inches, with isolated 10-inch amounts

Western Alabama, northern Mississippi, southern Tennessee, north Georgia, northern South Carolina, western North Carolina: 2 to 4 inches

Isolated tornadoes will also be a concern early this week.

Recap So Far: Leeward Islands, Caribbean, Florida Keys, South Florida Battered

Irma's center came ashore a second time in the Sunshine State at 3:35 p.m. Sunday in Marco Island as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph.

As the eyewall moved through Naples late Sunday afternoon, a wind gust to 142 mph was reported. A gust to 130 mph was clocked at the Marco Island Emergency Operations Center.

According to the National Hurricane Center, the center of Irma crossed Cudjoe Key just east of Key West around 9:10 a.m. EDT Sunday, with maximum sustained winds at the time estimated at 130 mph and a central pressure of 929 millibars.

An estimated storm surge of 10 to 14 feet was seen on Cudjoe Key, in the Lower Keys of Florida as the eye moved ashore Sunday morning.

The NWS office in Key West warned of "swaths of tornado-like damage" possible in the eyewall that hammered the Lower Keys earlier Sunday. Storm surge in Key West topped out around 3.3 feet.

A weather sensor on Big Pine Key east of Key West clocked a 120 mph wind gust around 9:38 a.m. Sunday.

A 91 mph gust was recorded at 7:55 a.m. at the NWS Office in Key West. Large trees were reported downed across from City Hall.

Wind gusts up to 109 mph have been clocked in the Miami/Ft. Lauderdale metro. A construction crane boom and counterweight collapsed over a building under construction in downtown Miami near Biscayne Boulevard.

Other notable wind gusts so far:

Lely (Collier County): 122 mph

North Perry Airport (Broward County): 109 mph

Miami International Airport (tower observation): 99 mph

St. Lucie Nuclear Power Plant: 99 mph

Cape Canaveral: 94 mph

Key Largo: 92 mph

Ochopee: 92 mph

Coral Gables: 90 mph

Fort Myers (Southwest Florida International Airport): 89 mph

Marathon Key: 88 mph

Deerfield Beach: 86 mph

Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport: 84 mph

Flagler Beach: 83 mph

Miami NWS/NHC office: 81 mph

Tampa Bay: 78 mph

Clearwater Beach: 79 mph; sustained to 59 mph

Sebring: 78 mph; sustained to 59 mph

West Palm Beach International Airport: 77 mph

Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport: 75 mph

Jacksonville International Airport: 75 mph

Port Charlotte (Charlotte County Airport): 74 mph

app-facebook US National Weather Service Miami Florida 5 hours ago . . Check out Irma's preliminary top wind gusts across South Florida. Gusts well over 100 mph were recorded as the eye wall moved over Marco Island and Naples. 24 1 35 SECURITY WARNING: Please treat the URL above as you would your password and do not share it with anyone. See the Facebook Help Center for more information.

Storm surge at Virgina Key, in Biscayne Bay, was close to 4 feet above normal tides Sunday afternoon. At Naples, in the Gulf of Mexico, storm surge topped 4 feet above normal tides early Sunday evening.

Over 10 inches of rain triggered flooding that shut down a stretch of U.S. 1 in Ft. Pierce, Florida, Sunday, with water reportedly into at least one home and parked cars flooded.

The Leeward Islands were pounded by Irma late Tuesday into Wednesday.

Irma first passed over Barbuda, an island of 1,600 residents, with gusts of at least 155 mph overnight into Wednesday morning. A storm surge of about eight feet was also recorded.

Early Wednesday morning, the eye of Irma then moved over St. Martin, St. Barthelemy and near Anguilla, where sustained winds of 117 mph were measured.

Hurricane-force winds and heavy rain were reported in the Virgin Islands. A wind gust of 131 mph was reported at Buck Island, and a gust of 87 mph was measured on St. Thomas Wednesday, Sept. 6.

In addition, a 111-mph gust was reported on Culebra.

Irma made landfall as a Category 5 hurricane late Friday night along the Camaguey Archipelago of Cuba. This is the first landfall of a Category 5 hurricane in Cuba since 1924, based on NOAA's historical hurricane tracks database. In Ciego de Avila, Cuba, Saturday morning, a wind gust to 159 mph was reported.

Check back with weather.com for updates on Irma through the weekend for the very latest. We will be updating our coverage of Irma frequently based on the latest forecast guidance for its future track and intensity.