Heavy sea swells associated with Hurricane Irma dumped debris on the road at the Castries Waterfront, prompting the dispatch of a cleanup crew from the Castries Constituency Council (CCC).

“We are doing some cleaning up because of the high tide – it brought in some garbage,” Timothy Alfred of the CCC said.

Alfred observed that the road was littered with plastic bottles, styrofoam cups and other trash.

He expressed the view that people should be more mindful of the way they dispose of their garbage and stop dumping trash in the sea.

“If we were getting the brunt of the hurricane – so much debris and things that would come onto the landscape – it is very dangerous and damaging,” Alfred said.

Met officials have said that heavy sea swells associated with Hurricane Irma are being experienced throughout the region.

The heavy sea swells even dumped a baby sea turtle onto land as the CCC crew conducted its cleanup.

As the region battens down for Hurricane Irma, Tropical Storm Jose, the 10th named storm of the 2017 Atlantic Hurricane Season has formed over the open Atlantic.

According to the Saint Lucia Meteorological Service, at 11:00 am on Tuesday, September 5, 2017, the center of Tropical Storm Jose was located near latitude 12.3 north, longitude 39.1 west or about 1505 miles or 2420 kilometres east of the Lesser Antilles.

Jose is moving toward the west-northwest near 13 mph or 20 km/h with maximum sustained winds near 40 mph or 65 km/h, with higher gusts.

Some strengthening is forecast during the next 48 hours and Jose could become a Hurricane by Friday.

Meanwhile, Category 5 Hurricane Irma continues on a westward track towards the Northern Leeward Islands with maximum sustained winds of 180 mph or 285 km/h and higher gusts.

At 11:00 am today, the eye of Hurricane Irma was located near latitude 16.8 north, longitude 58.4 west or about 225 miles or 365 kilometres east of Antigua.

On the forecast track, the dangerous core of Irma is expected to move over portions of the northern Leeward Islands tonight and early Wednesday.

Rain bands from Hurricane Irma with embedded thunderstorms and gusty winds are expected to affect the island chain during next 24 hours. Irma is also expected to cause dangerous northeasterly sea swells around the region.

Consequently, residents in areas prone to flooding and landslides are advised to be vigilant and to monitor the progress of this storm, while small craft operators and sea bathers are advised to stay away from the sea and beach area due to life threatening sea swells and extremely rough seas.

Boat operators and residents of areas near the coastline have been advised to be very vigilant and to make sure that their property is secure.