The Florida Keys are in the throes of a “humanitarian crisis,” and residents may not be able to return for weeks after Hurricane Irma lashed the archipelago with 130-mph winds, causing widespread destruction and leaving residents without water, power or cellphone service, according to officials.

“My heart goes out to the people in the Keys — there’s devastation and I just hope everybody survived,” Gov. Rick Scott said Monday after touring the destruction.

“It’s horrible what we saw,” Scott added. “We saw a lot of boats washed ashore; we saw basically every trailer park — they’re overturned. I don’t think I saw one trailer park where almost everything wasn’t overturned.”

The storm surge swallowed one of the islands and left another incommunicado, according to state Rep. Holly Raschein.

“Marathon was completely underwater,” said Raschein, according to the Miami Herald.

She continued, “Cudjoe Key took a direct hit; we’re still having problems communicating there. Flooding on Big Pine. It’s pretty widespread.”

Monroe County officials describe the Keys currently as being like a Third World country.

“The wind may have stopped blowing, but for most of the Florida Keys, there is no fuel, electricity, running water or cell service,” a Monday statement read. “For many people, supplies are running low and anxiety is running high.”

The Keys’ more than 70,000 residents were ordered to evacuate ahead of the storm, but an estimated 10,000 refused to leave and instead hunkered down as the raging storm blew down trees, homes and power lines, according to various news reports.

“This is a humanitarian crisis,” Monroe County emergency management director Martin Senterfitt said Sunday as the storm was barreling through the islands.

At least one man was killed in the Keys after his truck was blown into a tree by powerful winds Sunday, but officials fear more casualties as rescue workers pick through the rubble.

The then-Category 4 storm made landfall Sunday evening in Cudjoe Key, with powerful bands raking much of the 110-mile-long island chain and dumping as much as a foot of rain on the archipelago.

The storm is expected to cause a total $20 billion to $40 billion in damages in the United States alone, according to catastrophe-modeling firm AIR Worldwide.

The Navy sent the USS Abraham Lincoln aircraft carrier, as well the USS Iwo Jima and the USS New York to aid search-and-rescue efforts in the Keys, according to Scott. Air Force and Air National Guard members are also flying rescue missions as emergency responders begin to pick through the rubble.

Key West — the chain’s southernmost islet — fared better than others, but officials there had to turn away aid-seekers Monday because they were having trouble feeding their own residents.

see also Tensions running high as Keys residents wait to return home Tempers flared Monday at the closed entrance to the Florida...

“We cannot support another mouth in Key West,” City Manager Jim Scholl said, according to the Miami Herald.

“The Keys are not open for business,” a statement issued Monday by Monroe County authorities began.

Officials plan to turn on water service briefly to the lower Keys on Tuesday, but they expect it can only last for two hours before “major leaks” further up the line make it “impossible to sustain continuous water,” according to a statement that also warned that residents would have to boil any water coming out of taps.

By Monday afternoon, four teams of state transportation workers had cleared just six of the 42 bridges that string together the small islands.

With US Route 1 being the only road connecting the Keys to one another, crews must clear the roadway before more aid can flow into the hard-hit area, according to officials.

Meanwhile, tempers flared as residents trying to re-enter the island chain from mainland Florida were turned away.

People erupted in protest when Monroe County police allowed two unmarked vehicles through the checkpoint in Florida City, near Key Largo, after saying that only utility companies and state contractors would be allowed to pass, according to a Miami Herald report.

“That’s bulls–t!” a Keys resident, who refused to give his name, shouted to cops at a RaceTrac gas station. “Those people are tourists!”

The Monroe County Sheriff’s Office and Florida Highway Patrol set up the roadblock, which prevented residents from jumping onto US Route 1 or Card Sound Road to make their way to the Keys.

Among those who were permitted access were members of the Florida National Guard, who showed up before sunrise to help clean up the debris-littered roads.

It may be days before residents who evacuated can re-enter, according to White House Homeland Security adviser Tom Bossert.

“The Keys are going to take a while,” Bossert said during a White House briefing.

“I would expect that the Keys are not fit for re-entry for regular citizenry for weeks.”

But locking residents out will only make them hesitant to follow evacuation orders in the future, according to resident Marc Serota.

“They are going to have the worst time getting us out next time,” he told Reuters.

With Post wires