MPs warn ministers that response has been found wanting as overseas subjects remain in grave need

Britain ‘not doing enough’ to help its Caribbean territories

British police officers will be deployed as part of the UK’s efforts to support the Caribbean islands left devastated by Hurricane Irma, the government announced yesterday as it scrambled to deflect criticisms over its handling of the disaster.

The UK’s response to Irma, which devastated the British overseas territories of the British Virgin Islands and Anguilla, has been found wanting, according to two influential MPs.

Hurricane Irma: Florida told to expect 15ft surges as storm closes in – latest updates Read more

The chairmen of the all-party foreign affairs and development select committees, Tom Tugendhat and Stephen Twigg, demanded that ministers explain their response to Irma, and warned that people in the UK’s overseas territories in the Caribbean remained in grave need.

Yesterday the government sought to hit back by revealing more about the £32m aid package that will be delivered to the British overseas territories in the Caribbean.

It came as the Foreign Office warned Britons that the situation in southern coastal states of the United States could “deteriorate significantly” as the hurricane made landfall.

“Our ability to provide assistance may be extremely limited,” the Foreign Office said. “You should ensure you have your own contingency plans in place and consider your travel plans very carefully.”

Almost 300 military personnel have already left the UK for the Caribbean as part of Operation Ruman, the Ministry of Defence said.

Meanwhile, the National Police Chiefs’ Council confirmed that officers would provide support to the British Virgin Islands force as part of the relief effort.

It said two members of the UK police cadre, who support the military in times of international crisis, flew out on Friday, while a further 53 British officers from 14 police forces are due to leave from RAF Brize Norton in co-operation with the MoD.

The officers will support the British Virgin Islands police force to maintain law and order, as well as help find missing people, including any British nationals.

Millions flee from Hurricane Irma's path as Florida prepares for deadly hit Read more

“We received offers of support from officers across the country as soon as this crisis began,” said the organisation’s lead for international policing, Chief Constable Andy Marsh.

The crew of RFA Mounts Bay, a British navy landing ship, is also providing support to the British Virgin Islands, conducting reconnaissance flights and delivering supplies and aid, while HMS Ocean is due to take equipment and aid supplies from Gibraltar to the Caribbean tomorrow.

“I haven’t seen anything on the scale of what we have seen here,” said Stephen Norris, commanding officer of Mounts Bay. “It is one of those storms which I think defies all expectations.”

People living on Anguilla said that they were without electricity and running water and were living in fear of looters.

They made a plea for portable generators, batteries and torches as well as first aid kits and sanitation and baby supplies. Some islanders said they had been told that they could expect to be without electricity for months.

More than 20 tonnes of UK aid shelter kits and solar lamps have been despatched to the Caribbean to provide immediate relief to people who have seen their homes destroyed by Hurricane Irma.

UK ministers pledged to double any public donations to the British Red Cross appeal for victims.

For every £1 given towards the relief effort in the Caribbean, a further £1 will be added through the Department for International Development’s Aid Match scheme, up to £3m.

However, the British response has been contrasted with that of France, whose overseas island territories of Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy have also been hit hard.

France’s director of public safety, Jacques Witkowski, said France had “1,100 people, both civilian and military, deployed on the islands” to help with recovery.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said on Facebook that it seemed increasingly clear that climate change was to blame.

“We cannot ignore that this is the latest in an increasing number of extreme weather events: from the floods that affected millions in Bangladesh, India, and Nepal to Tropical Storm Harvey and the terrible mudslides in Sierra Leone.”