CLOSE Video of Hurricane Irma at its strongest on Sunday at The Preserve at Naples off Pine Ridge Road and Whipporwill. Submitted by Aubree Souza. Submitted by Aubree Souza

Wind advisory issued as Nashville feels the effects of Tropical Storm Irma (Photo: NWS)

Nashville's Emergency Operations Center deactivated at 1 a.m. Tuesday as Irma’s arrival in Middle Tennessee was much less severe than expected in the area.

Officials partially activated the EOC at 8 p.m. Monday in anticipation of strong winds from Tropical Depression Irma as the storm moved inland after making landfall in Florida over the weekend.

The National Weather Service in Nashville forecasted the storm would bring strong winds. Middle Tennessee remains under a Wind Advisory until 7 a.m. Tuesday. Winds of 15 to 30 mph with gusts up to 45 mph will be common, according to the NWS.

Wind gusts up to 50 mph will also be possible for some areas.

Locally, there were no reports of closed roads, mass power outages, water rescues or the need to cancel or delay school Tuesday.

More: Where is Hurricane Irma: See latest track, radar updates

More: Hurricane Irma: 101st Airborne sending soldiers, helicopters to aid storm recovery in Florida

Nashville was expected to begin feeling the effects of Irma Monday evening, but the system itself — downgraded tomerely a remnant low — isn't set to arrive in Tennessee until early Wednesday morning, said NWS meteorologist Jason Wright.

Wright said the center of the storm would hit the central portion of Western Tennessee around 2 a.m. Wednesday.

The weather service issued a wind advisory for Middle Tennessee from 4 p.m. Monday to 7 a.m. Tuesday from Irma's outer bands, bringing gusts of up to 50 miles per hour and sustained winds of up to 35 miles per hour.

Between Monday afternoon and Wednesday morning, northwest Tennessee is expected to receive an inch of rain, while southwest Tennessee could have around 2.5 inches of rainfall, Wright said.

No flooding is expected to take place across the state, including in Middle Tennessee.

"Now that the remnants of Hurricane Irma are upon us and the impact on Middle Tennessee has been rather underwhelming, can we go ahead and look beyond?" the NWS posted on its Facebook page Tuesday morning.

According to the NWS, the next couple of days will still be wet and cool and fall-like, but several more summer days are still lurking around the corner.

The last of the Irma-related showers will depart on Thursday, and starting Friday, the greater Nashville area can expect highs in the mid 80's and clear skies at least through early next week.

How Nashville is preparing

The Nashville Emergency Response Viewing Engine (NERVE) will be available online over the next few days. The website provides information on road closures, shelters, disaster recovery and other resources provided in case of emergencies.

NERVE is accessible online at http://maps.nashville.gov/NERVE/.

Outside of Middle Tennessee, Nashville first responders are already at work conducting Hurricane Irma disaster relief.

Members of the Nashville Fire Department and several other Metro departments on Monday conducted water rescues in Jacksonville, Fla., where some residents had become stranded in their homes due to flooding. They crew is expected to continue relief efforts Tuesday.

Roughly 370 soldiers and a fleet of helicopters from the Army's 101st Airborne Division are also headed to Florida to assist for the first time with hurricane relief efforts.

Reach Andy Humbles at ahumbles@tennessean.com and Natalie Allison at nallison@tennessean.com

&amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp; &amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp; &amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;!--iframe--&amp;amp;amp;amp;gt; &amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp;

Read or Share this story: https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/2017/09/11/nashvilles-emergency-operations-center-partially-activate-outer-bands-irma-move/654624001/