Hurricane Irma, the most powerful Atlantic hurricane on record, destroyed the four “most solid” buildings on the small Caribbean island after it reached land. Irma updates show from St Martin show truly shocking devastation, with video reports showing the extent of the damage as people start to rebuild their lives. The French interior minister Gerard Collomb said serious flooding and building damage has affected a number of the local islands. He said: “We know that the four most sold buildings on the island have been destroyed, which means that the most rustic structures have probably been completely or partially destroyed.”

INSTAGRAM Hurricane Irma update: St Martin damage shown after devastating storm

Footage uploaded by an Instagram user on St Martin showed the remains of what appears to be a hotel overlooking a marina. The Irma footage shows furniture and glass smashed on the floor after its been hurled across the room by the 185 MPH wind which savaged the island. The filmmaker then proceeds to show the extent of the damage from a balcony overlooking the island. Trees can be seen spread across the floor as they were unrooted by the storm, and vehicles are left upside down.

St Maarten, the Dutch side of the island, had its famous international airport destroyed after the deadly storm made landfall. Huge rocks crashed into planes, boarding walkways were thrown around like rag dolls and huge mounds of sand were left on the runway from the nearby Maho beach. Princess Juliana International Airport is known internationally because planes landing on its runway make an incredibly close flyover of St Maarten’s popular tourist spot Maho beach. Princess Juliana International Airport had suspended its operations on Tuesday as a precaution before Hurricane Irma hit.

Hurricane Irma: Damage in the Caribbean latest pictures Sat, September 9, 2017 Hurricane Irma sowed a trail of deadly devastation through the Caribbean Play slideshow AFP/Getty Images 1 of 91 A man walks on a street covered in debris after hurricane Irma hurricane