The measure approved Thursday would continue government funding through Dec. 8 and extend the debt limit for the same period. It would also temporarily extend the National Flood Insurance Program, which is to expire on Sept. 30.

Mr. Schumer continued to revel in the sudden deal with the president, describing the agreement as a “ray of hope for both parties” and talking up the virtues of bipartisanship.

“This agreement is a reminder that we don’t always have to wait until the 11th hour — risking shutdown, risking default — in order to compromise and do the right thing,” Mr. Schumer said.

But that was little consolation to conservatives already frustrated that Republican leaders were moving toward raising the government’s borrowing capacity without also putting in place spending cuts or other conservative policy changes.

“What we’re doing in this body today is not draining the swamp,” said Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska, who voted no. “What we’re doing is running a whole bunch of hoses to the edge of the swamp, turning them on to the highest possible volume flow, and then turning our backs on the swamp and shouting, ‘There’s nothing to see here!’ ”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Sasse offered a warning about the leverage that Democrats would hold later this year, saying that despite being the minority leader, Mr. Schumer “just made himself the most powerful man in America for the month of December.”

Another Republican who voted no, Senator James Lankford of Oklahoma, said it had become clear that the debt limit was no longer being viewed as “a chance to actually tackle our runaway debt problems.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Rather, it is used as a political football to move through the pending business of the day,” he said.

Before approving the legislation, the Senate rejected a proposal by Mr. Sasse to pass only the hurricane relief measure that had sailed through the House, without the debt limit or stopgap spending measure as part of it. Lawmakers also rejected a proposal by Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, to pay for hurricane relief using funds intended to be spent on foreign aid.

The House plans to vote on the Senate-approved legislation on Friday, and its passage seems all but assured given the expected Democratic support for it. Still, conservatives unhappy about how the debt limit is being handled will have to decide whether that matter justifies a “no” vote on a measure providing billions of dollars in hurricane relief.

In a sign of the dissatisfaction over the deal, the leadership of the Republican Study Committee, a conservative bloc of more than 150 House members, came out against it on Thursday.

“Not attaching any kind of reform to the debt ceiling shows irresponsibility, as opposed to fiscal responsibility,” said Representative Mark Walker of North Carolina, the group’s chairman.

Heritage Action for America, a conservative group, urged lawmakers to vote against what it described as the “Pelosi-Schumer-Trump debt ceiling deal.”

“Beyond the politics of exploiting hurricane victims and potentially delaying much-needed disaster relief, the proposed combination is wrong on policy grounds,” the group wrote.

The $15 billion in disaster aid is expected to be just the first piece of the overall aid that Congress provides in response to Hurricane Harvey. And with Hurricane Irma approaching Florida, there was already talk in the Senate about taking further action to ensure the government can respond to storm victims.

“I want the Senate to be forewarned that this $15 billion package, this is only temporary,” said Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida. “It will probably only take us through mid-October at the most, with the massive amount of requirements in Texas, and add to that at least that much, if not more, for the Eastern Seaboard.”