Notes: Date/Time: Date and time when the circulation center crosses the U.S. coastline (including barrier islands). Time is estimated to the nearest hour. Lat/Lon: Location is estimated to the nearest 0.1 degrees latitude and longitude (about 6 nm). Max Winds: Estimated maximum sustained (1 min) surface (10 m) winds to occur along the U. S. coast. SSHWS: The estimated Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale at landfall based upon maximum 1-min surface winds. RMW: The radius of maximum winds (primarily for the right front quadrant of the hurricane), if available. Cent Press: The central pressure of the hurricane at landfall. Central pressure values in parentheses indicate that the value is a simple estimation (based upon a wind-pressure relationship), not directly measured or calculated. OCI (Outer Closed Isobar): The sea level pressure at the outer limits of the hurricane circulation as determined by analysis of the outer closed isobar (in increments of 1 mb). Size: This is the average radius of the OCI. States Affected: The impact of the hurricane upon individual U.S. states by Saffir-Simpson Scale (again through the estimate of the maximum 1-min surface winds at each state). (ATX-South Texas, BTX-Central Texas, CTX-North Texas, LA-Louisiana, MS-Mississippi, AL-Alabama, AFL-Northwest Florida, BFL-Southwest Florida, CFL-Southeast Florida, DFL-Northeast Florida, GA-Georgia, SC-South Carolina, NC-North Carolina, VA-Virginia, MD-Maryland, DE-Delaware, NJ-New Jersey, NY-New York, PA-Pennsylvania, CT-Connecticut, RI-Rhode Island, MA-Massachusetts, NH-New Hampshire, ME-Maine. In Texas, south is roughly from the Mexico border to Corpus Christi; central is from north of Corpus Christi to Matagorda Bay and north is from Matagorda Bay to the Louisiana border. In Florida, the north-south dividing line is from Cape Canaveral [28.45N] to Tarpon Springs [28.17N]. The dividing line between west-east Florida goes from 82.69W at the north Florida border with Georgia, to Lake Okeechobee and due south along longitude 80.85W.) $ - Indicates that the hurricane may not have been reliably estimated for intensity (both central pressure and maximum 1-min windspeed) because of landfall in a relatively uninhabited region. Errors in intensity are likely to be underestimates of the true intensity. # - Indicates that hurricane made landfall first over Mexico, but caused hurricane winds in Texas. The position given is that of Mexican landfall. The strongest winds impacted Mexico. The winds indicated here are lower than in HURDAT and are lower than they were over Mexico. Central pressure given is that at Mexican landfall. & - Indicates that the hurricane center did make a direct landfall, but that the strongest winds likely remained offshore. Thus the winds indicated here are lower than in HURDAT. % - Indicates that maximum winds (shown here) to affect the U.S. coastline occurred well-before landfall. Winds at the time of landfall were lower than shown here. * - Indicates that the hurricane center did not make a U.S. landfall (or substantially weakened before making landfall), but did produce the indicated hurricane-force winds over land. In this case, central pressure is given for the hurricane's point of closest approach.