Orlando City will be out of town when Hurricane Irma bears down on Florida this weekend, but that means the Lions likely will not be able to return to Orlando as planned after playing D.C. United at 7 Saturday night.

“I think we’re just taking it day by day,” Lions coach Jason Kreis said. “I don’t think there’s any decisions made, but obviously our next game is in Atlanta, so there could be a situation where we would just go straight to Atlanta, but we’ll sort that out as we go.”

Orlando City plays Atlanta at 4 p.m. Sept. 16.

Kreis gave the team Thursday off to prepare their families and houses for the impending storm before leaving town. Some of the players may bring their families on the road with them or bring them somewhere out of the hurricane’s path before heading up north.

While Kreis was in Orlando for Hurricane Matthew last year, many players never have been through this situation.

Swiss-English right back Scott Sutter lives on the third floor of an apartment complex and tried to prepare his place according to a check list handed out by the housing community.

“It’s obviously something I’ve never experienced, so everything is new. It’s a bit hairy, I’m not going to lie,” Sutter said. “I was at Publix this morning before training and there was already a queue of about 40, 50 people at 6:50. So, I think people are pretty much all hands on deck.

“Like I said, this is my first time so I don’t really know what to do. I asked Servando [Carrasco] if I can borrow a flashlight because everywhere was sold out.”

Sutter insisted the massive storm system is not taking focus away from Saturday’s game.

Victor “PC” Giro saw plenty of storms roll through the state during his time playing in the North American Soccer League for the Fort Lauderdale Strikers, but few have lived through a storm as large and powerful as Irma.

“Yeah, I’m a little scared,” Giro said through a translator. “I’ve been through this before but it wasn’t quite like this. I hope to go to the game this weekend, go with my wife there so she’s there and I can be calm in D.C.”

Chippy training

The Lions are dealing with a lot of distractions this week. In addition to the hurricane prep, midfielder Will Johnson was arrested and charged with domestic battery.

The team already was feeling pressure and disappointment over subpar results the past few months and its playoff chances slipping away, but Kreis said the players remained focused in training the first half of the week.

“It’s been good. It’s been chippy,” Kreis said after Wednesday’s training, a couple hours before news broke of Johnson’s arrest. “You can see that the competitive levels are firing up right now and that there’s some players who are pretty unhappy with where we’re at, which is typical, but the spirit has been good, the energy’s been good and the work-rate has been good. So, we're getting prepared.”

When asked if motivation to perform well in the final matches of the season comes down to pride, Kreis said it better.

“Pride better be a part of every single game we play,” said the second-year coach. “These players need to be proud of what they’ve done and how hard they’ve worked this year. They need to go into every match expecting that they’re basically on trial because we are. We’re professionals, we get paid well to do what we do and if we don’t do a good job they’ll give the job to somebody else. Same dor the players, same for the coaches, all of us should know that.”

CAPTION Former Red Bulls player Sacha Kljestan who now plays for Orlando City provides insight on strategies for their game against the New York Red Bulls. Former Red Bulls player Sacha Kljestan who now plays for Orlando City provides insight on strategies for their game against the New York Red Bulls. CAPTION Former Red Bulls player Sacha Kljestan who now plays for Orlando City provides insight on strategies for their game against the New York Red Bulls. Former Red Bulls player Sacha Kljestan who now plays for Orlando City provides insight on strategies for their game against the New York Red Bulls. CAPTION We interviewed Orlando Pride's head coach Tom Sermanni on the upcoming season with a roster of new players. We interviewed Orlando Pride's head coach Tom Sermanni on the upcoming season with a roster of new players. CAPTION Orlando Health conducts a 'Stop the Bleed Training' session for Orlando City Soccer Club’s office personnel. The Bleeding Control Basic course is designed for individuals who have little or no medical training but who may be called upon as immediate responders to provide initial care and bleeding control to someone in need prior to the arrival of emergency medical services. Orlando Health conducts a 'Stop the Bleed Training' session for Orlando City Soccer Club’s office personnel. The Bleeding Control Basic course is designed for individuals who have little or no medical training but who may be called upon as immediate responders to provide initial care and bleeding control to someone in need prior to the arrival of emergency medical services. CAPTION Orlando City will host D.C. United for its season opener on Saturday, March 3rd. Orlando City will host D.C. United for its season opener on Saturday, March 3rd. CAPTION Jordan Culver describes Orlando City's new white and purple away kit Jordan Culver describes Orlando City's new white and purple away kit

ardelgallo@orlandosentinel.com