All 42 bridges that connect U.S. 1 from the mainland across the Florida Keys are safe for travel after a state inspection, Monroe County officials said.

The Florida Department of Transportation also repaired two stretches of the highway that had washed away during Hurricane Irma two days earlier — at mile marker 37 and mile marker 75 — and they are also ready for motorists.

Still, only the Upper Keys remained open to residents and business owners as the Lower Keys, including Key West, languished without power and cellphone service and food and fuel remained scarce.

“FEMA has arrived in Key West,” stated the Tuesday night update by the county.

Never miss a local story. Sign up today for a free 30 day free trial of unlimited digital access. SUBSCRIBE NOW

Disaster Medical Assistance Teams had arrived Tuesday to set up in Key West at the Florida Keys Community College and the city of Marathon Park. County officials said they will become operational Wednesday.

Two distribution centers for food and water opened in Key West on Tuesday, one at the Sears Town Plaza in New Town and the other in Bahama Village in Old Town.

Two other distribution sites are in the works at Sugarloaf School and the National Key Deer Refuge office on the Overseas Highway in Big Pine Key.

In Key West, 80 percent of the roads are cleared of debris and it’s expected all streets will be passable soon, county officials said.

Also in Key West, the sewer treatment facility is now functioning. Anyone with running water or a bucket of water will be able to flush.

SHARE COPY LINK More Videos 59 Texas girl reunited with beloved doll lost during Hurricane Harvey Pause 70 Sailboats wrecked on mansion lawn are removed months after Hurricane Irma 126 Special tank allows scientists to churn up category 5 hurricane force storms 69 Recapping the 2017 hurricane season 132 NASA video shows active 2017 hurricane season simulation 119 Puerto Rico’s economy took a ‘Category Five’ hit 101 Unemployment on the rise in Puerto Rico 49 Governor of Puerto Rico speaks about the unemployment situation on the island 42 Weather deteriorates in South Florida as TS Philippe approaches 27 Tropical Storm watch for parts of coastal South Florida as unnamed storm approaches Video Link copy Embed Code copy

Facebook

Twitter

Email

Hurricane Irma storm surge destroys Snapper's Restaurant in Key Largo. Al DiazMiami Herald

“Every day, every hour goes by with more progress,” said County Administrator Roman Gastesi.

Florida Keys Electric Co-op, which services the Upper Keys to the end of the Seven Mile Bridge, has fully energized its main transmission line and all its substations and is working on feeder lines to the neighborhoods. There is a base camp at Founders Park in Islamorada for the contracted crews.

The Co-op reports about 30 percent of its customers have power and are bringing more people online each day.

There still is no power in the Lower Keys.

Keys Energy, which handles the rest of the Keys coverage area, is making good progress and expects to be able to bring power to Key West in a few days, officials said.

The hardest hit areas around Big Pine Key and Cudjoe Key will take longer. There are about 300 downed power poles, which take time to replace.

From 10 a.m. to noon Wednesday, Key West will have water from stored supplies and an old plant.

There is still a precautionary boil water notice in effect for all of the Keys.

The dusk-to-dawn curfew will remain in place until further notice. “Any citizen out moving around at night will be stopped by law enforcement and will be sent home,” Monroe County Sheriff Office Col. Lou Caputo said.

SHARE COPY LINK More Videos 59 Texas girl reunited with beloved doll lost during Hurricane Harvey Pause 70 Sailboats wrecked on mansion lawn are removed months after Hurricane Irma 126 Special tank allows scientists to churn up category 5 hurricane force storms 69 Recapping the 2017 hurricane season 132 NASA video shows active 2017 hurricane season simulation 119 Puerto Rico’s economy took a ‘Category Five’ hit 101 Unemployment on the rise in Puerto Rico 49 Governor of Puerto Rico speaks about the unemployment situation on the island 42 Weather deteriorates in South Florida as TS Philippe approaches 27 Tropical Storm watch for parts of coastal South Florida as unnamed storm approaches Video Link copy Embed Code copy

Facebook

Twitter

Email

Sandy Cove condo located in Lower Matecumbe Key in the town of Islamorada collapsed due to the storm surge of Hurricane Irma. Laura Gilbert, the daughter in-law of the unit owner, explains what she believes happened to the property on Tuesday, September 12, 2017. Al Diaz / Edited by Matias J. OcnerMiami Herald Staff

AIRPORTS

Key West International Airport and Florida Keys Marathon International are open for emergency response flights. They remain closed until further notice for commercial flights and general aviation.

JAIL

Monroe County has set up a temporary jail in Marathon. A local judge will hold first appearances every other day. One looter is now in custody. Monroe County Sheriff’s Office is being helped from a large contingent of law enforcement officers from outside the County to help with security.

GROCERY STORES

The Winn-Dixie and Publix grocery stores opened Tuesday in Key Largo with limited hours.