Ms. Carrasquillo, 54, shrugged.

“This is how it is mijo.”

As of Saturday evening, about 40 percent of the island did not have power and 13 percent of households were without water, local officials said. That was down from 34 percent on Thursday, when Irma swept past. An estimated 15 of the 69 hospitals on the island were running on generators.

“It’s the lack of maintenance in our infrastructure,” Gov. Ricardo Rosselló said in an interview. “I don’t want to point fingers, but the truth is it’s been periods of over a decade with very little or no investment in the maintenance of our infrastructure, and that makes us more susceptible.”

Electrical power, produced by the government-owned Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, known as Prepa, has long been a burden on the island’s economy. The utility effectively declared bankruptcy in July and cannot tap into capital markets after defaulting on $9 billion in bond debt.

Efforts to modernize Prepa’s plants, which burn imported oil to produce electricity, and diversify energy sources have mostly come to a halt. Trees near power lines have gone untrimmed, poles unattended. And residents have come to distrust the island’s electrical grid, which started faltering hours before the bluster of Irma grazed Puerto Rico.

“Here, a small gust blows in and the light is gone,” said Zenaida Quiñones, 53, whose cement house in Loíza is still dark. Ms. Quiñones said that even under normal conditions she typically lost power three or four times a week.

Photo

“I’m used to it now,” said Ms. Quiñones, whose refrigerators are often damaged by the failures. “What am I supposed to do? There’s only one electric company.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For Puerto Ricans, Irma was a close call that revealed the system’s chronic fragility and heightened the urgency to strengthen the island’s antiquated infrastructure before future natural disasters.

“This is a moment of crisis that we need to benefit from and transform into an opportunity of change, production and investment,” Jenniffer González, the island’s nonvoting representative in Congress, said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

How a commonwealth going through a decade-long recession will be able to pay for much-needed upgrades is the key question. One option is to turn to the private sector, local economists say.

Private investments, Mr. Rosselló said, could be accelerated under a provision of a contentious new law called Promesa, which placed the island’s finances under the oversight of a federal board. The provision could expedite and facilitate the process for private investment in electric, highway and water projects.

Hurricane Irma “can become an opportunity or another liability,” Mr. Rosselló said.

But the idea of privatizing public utilities is a divisive one on the island. The electrical workers’ union fears that the government purposely let Prepa deteriorate over time to justify privatizing it.

Photo

“There were 6,800 linemen in the year 2000. Now we have 3,500,” said Ángel Figueroa Jaramillo, president of the Irrigation and Electrical Workers Union, the largest union representing Prepa workers. “And the number of miles of power lines has more than doubled in that time. They cut personnel, reduced material and cut back on maintenance. All this adds up to not meeting your obligations.”

Carlos Monroig, a Prepa spokesman, said he could not comment on the union’s statements because the company’s leadership had changed and the current director, Ricardo Ramos, had been on the job only five months. Prepa had already acknowledged its “vulnerabilities” and “deteriorating system” in the past, Mr. Monroig said.

He added that in the wake of the storm, the company had deployed hundreds of repair teams working 12-hour shifts to bring back power across the island. By Saturday night, Mr. Monroig said, Prepa had restored electricity to almost 887,000 of the 1.2 million customers affected by the shutdown.

In San Juan, the capital, it was hard to tell that one of the strongest hurricanes ever recorded in the Atlantic basin had roared past and taken out the power grid. Resorts were lit. Restaurants bustled along the Condado promenade.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But in more rural Loíza, Melissa Rivera and Jorge Tavera had suffered far more than a temporary loss of power: They were one of 79 families there left without a home, a sobering reminder that even a glancing blow from a hurricane can devastate lives.

The couple weathered the storm in a neighbor’s house, watching as winds ripped apart their zinc roof and rains drenched every corner of their two-bedroom home.

“All I thought was, ‘Wow, my house is gone,’” Ms. Rivera said, standing near a pool of water that had once been her living room. “I don’t have anywhere to live anymore.”