Hurricane Irma doesn’t have to be a disaster says TCI's Disaster Management director Virginia Clerveaux H urricanes like Irma which currently poses a serious threat to the Turks and Caicos Islands don’t have to be disasters, they are simply hazards, said Dr. Virginia Clerveaux, Director of the Department of Disaster Management and Emergencies (DDME).



“It’s a lack of preparedness by residents and other entities that make [hurricanes] a disaster," Clerveaux said at a press conference held on Monday, September 4th, 2017 at the Premier’s Office in Providenciales. "We don’t expect to have a disaster on our hands because we’re expecting residents to play their part.”



Clerveaux, who was at the media briefing along with Governor Dr. John Freeman, Deputy Governor Hon. Anya Williams, Premier Hon. Sharlene Cartwright-Robinson and Minister of Home Affairs Hon. Delroy Williams, added that it would be the righter bands of the hurricane which would primarily affect the country.



“What the experts in the field are saying is that the righter side of the storm is actually stronger. That is where you have most of your strong winds coming from. That is what the model is showing. In terms of rainfall, we’re expecting maximum amount of rainfall throughout the Turks and Caicos Islands. It’s not a case, at this point, where we can say these are the islands that will be definitely impacted versus the others. What I would like to remind the general public of is whether it’s a category 3 storm or a category 4 storm, you need to prepare,” said Clerveaux.



She urged islanders to ensure a maximum level of preparedness in order to effectively and safely survive the storm.



“Don’t get too caught up on the category at this stage because in a few days if you don’t have preparations in place, you will recognize that you are ill-prepared to ride out the storm. We will continue to provide you with advice; we have mechanisms in place to assist you. We are preparing for ... a major storm. We just need to ensure now that residents of the Turks and Caicos Islands do their part,” she continued.



The principal goal of the DDME is to make certain that all residents have the information necessary to keep themselves safe during an emergency. In order to achieve widespread awareness, the DDME is disseminating information in English, Creole and Spanish via their website, Facebook, radio, SMS text and Whatsapp.



submit your comments



