If a hurricane comes this year, people in South Florida will find new rules for getting out of town.

A new evacuation plan from the Florida Department of Transportation allows motorists to drive on the shoulders of highways instead of the more complicated process of making all lanes one-way.

The routes include Interstate 75 along Alligator Alley, I-4 from Tampa to Orlando, I-10 from Jacksonville to I-75, and I-75 from Wildwood to the Georgia state line.

However, part of Florida’s Turnpike will continue to make all lanes toll-free and one-way in the event a hurricane reaches Category 3 (111 mph) or stronger.

The turnpike evacuation route begins just north of the Boynton Beach Interchange, at mile marker 88, and continues north for 166 miles to the Orlando area, ending at mile marker 254.

“The benefits of the shoulder-use plan are that it takes just a great deal less staff and resources to accomplish that as opposed to reverse lanes or contraflow,” said Jeff Frost, with FDOT.

“We are not going to do shoulder-running on the turnpike because there’s just too many pinch-points [where shoulders narrow or disappear under bridges and overpasses] to make that feasible,” he said.

The few remaining interstate pinch-points where evacuation routes narrow will be handled with signs, detours, lane shifting or a temporary traffic control plan such as having police direct traffic, Frost said.

Florida’s reversible lane plan was inspired by road-clogging evacuations before Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and Hurricane Floyd in 1999.

But, some emergency managers have expressed reservations about the practicality of the long-held tactic.

For example, converting an 80-mile stretch of Alligator Alley into four lanes of one-way traffic would require hundreds of highway patrol cars, more than 4,000 orange cones and 24 hours to implement.

A trooper would have to be stationed at every median crossover, exit and entrance ramp to keep cars from turning around and going the wrong way.

One wrong-way collision involving a confused driver would slow or stall evacuation traffic and defeat the purpose of the reverse lanes.

Some drivers are hesitant to go against the flow, Frost said.

“Fewer people are going to get on the reverse lanes to automatically cut the traffic load in half,” he said. “They just wouldn’t feel comfortable for whatever reason.”

Several coastal and gulf states from Virginia to Texas have adopted the one-way vehicle evacuation strategy on select highways as a worst case scenario option, but Texas is also considering shoulder usage on some roadways.

In 2005, about 3 million Houston evacuees fled Hurricane Rita using the interstate to Dallas that was converted to one-way lanes. But it was too late.

Many drivers became stranded in extreme heat when they ran out of gas. Managers miscalculated how many people would flee, and many of them didn’t need to evacuate.

Shoulder use is also seen as a time-saver.

Roads allowing shoulder use can be driven 24 hours a day, allowing more people to flee. Reverse lanes could be driven only in daylight.

“We did do simulations [and] models that showed the amount of traffic you can move using shoulder-running is comparable to the reverse lanes and one of the reasons is you’re able to do it for a longer period of time,” Frost said.

Under the new plan, the inside or left shoulder would be open to evacuees on interstate roadways with three or more lanes in each direction.

Highways with two lanes in each direction would open the outside or right shoulder to traffic.

Because shoulders are 2 feet narrower than regular lanes and have rumble-strips, top speeds will be 30 to 40 mph and only cars and SUVs will be able to use them. Buses and trucks must use regular lanes.

Road Rangers and law enforcement officers will be deployed to pull disabled vehicles off the shoulders.

Once the danger has passed, very little needs to be done to reinstate regular traffic patterns.

“With shoulder running, once the traffic congestion dissipates, drivers gravitate back into the normal traffic lanes,” he said.

The shoulder-use plan will not apply to other major roadways.

Staff researcher Barbara Hijek contributed to this report.

wkroustan@sunsentinel.com or 954-356-4303 or Twitter @WayneRoustan

Stay informed on South Florida's roads, rails and trails with our free newsletter by Dr. Detour, a.k.a. Wayne K. Roustan. Sign up at sunsentinel.com/detour