By Olivia Rose

THE TURKS and Caicos Islands along with several British overseas territories will now be eligible to receive official development aid.





Changes have been made to international rules which previously barred the territories from UK financial aid as they were deemed too rich.





Amendments agreed in Paris by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).





These changes will now enable the Turks and Caicos Islands to benefit from a £13 billion relief fund to aid in the territory’s recovery.





The OECD, the body that sets the rules, recently agreed that aid could be used for short-term help for middle-income countries.





Under previous OECD rules, the Turks and Caicos Islands, Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands that were hit by hurricane Irma last month were unable to receive Official Development Assistance (ODA).





All three territories had gross national incomes higher than the benchmark set for countries or territories to be eligible.





The OECD’s Development Assistance Committee (DAC) rejected a UK plan for small island states to be allowed to waive the rules in crisis.





But instead the 30 member countries backed a different plan to use official aid in temporary emergencies but on the crucial condition that no ODA is diverted from existing recipients in the process.





The DAC also agreed to establish a new mechanism for middle-income countries to be reinstated on to the list of ODA-eligible recipients if they suffer a long-term economic decline.





Backlash

There was much controversy after it was revealed that Britain’s £13 billion aid budget could not be used to help repair the Islands.





Former Premier Rufus Ewing lashed out at the UK calling the government "hypocritical and convenient” for neglecting the needs of the Turks and Caicos Islands after the catastrophic impact of hurricane Irma.





He said the British government opportunely categorised the TCI as a "foreign” and "wealthy” nation to avoid aiding the territory in its recovery efforts.





"The Turks and Caicos Islands, otherwise known as British overseas territories, yes British overseas territories of which the Queen is Head of State where her appointed Governor represents her interest, are now conveniently considered to be foreign.





"I cry shame on the British government with a department for international development that can find £25 million of aid to help Rohingya Muslims being driven from their homes by the military but cannot support its own.”





He said that during the declared state of emergency where the UK Governor was fully in charge, he brought in British troops without the consent of the people.





"Coming to our shores with guns and boots doesn’t bring our people relief they need, you need to instead come with some of the £13 billion in aid funds that have been earmarked for the British overseas territories.”





He urged the UK government to alter the OECD regulations or fund the relief effort out of its own pockets since he said the TCI is owed this and much more.





International Development Secretary Priti Patel described the changes to the regulation as a "real step forward”.





She said: "…we welcome the clear support from the head of the OECD for our efforts.”





Patel previously argued that the rules needed to be "relevant and up to date”.





"We believe that the international rules should take into account the vulnerabilities of small island states.





"These rules were first established over 40 years ago, the world has changed dramatically since then, and we will work constructively with international partners to ensure the rules remain relevant,” Patel said.



