A motion has been filed in the Freddie Gray case asking that Baltimore City State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby and her office to be recused from the case.

Mobile users tap here to watch video

The attorneys representing the six city police officers facing various charges filed joint motions in Baltimore City District Court to either dismiss the case altogether or get an independent prosecutor.

The officers charged are Sgt. Alicia White, Lt. Brian Rice, Officer William Porter, Officer Edward Nero, Officer Garrett Miller and Officer Caesar Goodson.

Attorney Marc L. Zayon, who represents Nero, released a statement to 11 News Friday afternoon saying: "The pleadings speak for themselves and we look forward to litigating them in the courtroom."

The motion claims numerous conflicts of interest that include prosecuting for political gain. According to the officers' attorneys, Mosby charged the officers on May 1 to quell Baltimore's unrest. They point to comments she made that day:

VIDEO: Marilyn Mosby's press conference in its entirety





"I heard your call for no justice, no peace. Your peace is sincerely needed as I work to deliver justice on behalf of this young man."

"You're at the forefront of this cause, and as young people, our time is now."

The officers' attorneys believe those comments violate Maryland law on prosecutor conduct, specifically, "refraining from making extrajudicial comments that have a substantial likelihood of heightening public condemnation of the accused."

The officers' attorneys also point to Mosby's marriage to Baltimore City Councilman Nick Mosby, whose district was damaged during the riots.

Another conflict of interest they claim is personal ties between one of the prosecutors and the media, specifically pertaining to interviews with Donta Allen, the other man in the police transport van with Gray.

Another conflict of interest they claim is the prosecution doing its own investigation of the case, separate from the Police Department's probe.

Another conflict of interest they claim is a pending civil claim against Mosby and her office for what the officers' attorneys say is Mosby's office including "false and misleading statements and omissions" in the charging documents specifically related to the argument about the legality of the knife the officers found on Gray during the arrest on April 12.

Another conflict of interest they claim is the financial interest of the attorney for Gray's family, Billie Murphy, who they claim is a close friend of Mosby.

"I'm not going to comment on anything that's been filed in court unless it is appropriate for me to comment," Murphy said.

WBAL-TV 11 News reached out to Mosby's office for comment but did not receive one Friday evening.

Stay with WBALTV.com and 11 News for more on this developing story.



