Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Several hundred people turned out in New York

Protests have unfolded in several US cities over Freddie Gray, whose death from injuries sustained in police custody has stoked unrest in Baltimore.

Several hundred people have gathered in New York's Union Square, where police arrested at least 60 people.

There were also rallies in Washington DC, Boston and Minneapolis.

A national debate over the use of police force has been going on since last summer, when a black teenager was killed in Ferguson, Missouri.

The US Department of Justice has opened an investigation into the death of Gray, who suffered fatal spinal injuries when arrested by police.

His funeral took place on Monday and was followed by widespread rioting, arson and looting.

Since then a curfew has been in place on the streets of Baltimore from 22:00 to 05:00.

Hours before the second night of curfew, on Wednesday evening, a large march made its way through Baltimore's streets.

Image copyright AP Image caption People gathered outside Baltimore's City Hall

Image copyright AP Image caption A Baltimore protester faces the National Guard

In New York, where protesters said they were demonstrating in solidarity with the people of Baltimore, protesters chanted "no justice, no peace" and "hands up, don't shoot".

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Police made arrests at the rally in New York

How Gray got his injuries is unclear. As well as the Department of Justice investigation, a separate internal inquiry is being conducted by the police.

The preliminary results of that police probe will not be released on Friday, as was expected, it has emerged.

Six police officers have been suspended with pay while this investigation is carried out.

Police timeline of Freddie Gray's arrest

Image copyright Murphy, Falcon & Murphy

Sunday, 12 April, 0839: Officers approach Gray and he flees on foot

Officers approach Gray and he flees on foot 0840: Gray arrested on corner of Presbury Street, Sandtown

Gray arrested on corner of Presbury Street, Sandtown 0842: Police request a van

Police request a van 0854: Van departs with Gray inside, conscious and speaking

Van departs with Gray inside, conscious and speaking 0924: Police request paramedics to take Gray to hospital

What we know about Gray's death