Maryland officials declared a state of emergency, brought in the National Guard and imposed a curfew after riots, looting and massive fires ravaged Baltimore on Monday following the funeral of a black man who was killed in police custody.

Hours after Freddie Gray’s funeral — and after his family had pleaded for peace — a small group of demonstrators began pelting cops with bricks and bottles.

It only got worse.

As darkness descended on the city, full-scale rioting engulfed many parts of the city and smoke rose from burned cop cars and stores, mixing with tear gas that police fired at the violent crowds. Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake called the agitators “thugs who only want to incite violence and destroy our city” as she declared streets off-limits between 10 p.m. and 5 a.m., starting Tuesday.

Firefighters had their hands full all night, and rioters threw projectiles at them in an effort to hamper the city's response.

Freddie Gray died April 19 while in police custody in Baltimore. (Jamiea Speller)

Officials said during an evening press conference that 15 police officers had been injured — two of whom were hospitalized — mostly by projectiles. At least 27 people had been arrested.

A huge blaze consumed a senior center that was under construction in what officials attributed to the escalating frenzy.

The violence erupted near the Baptist church where Gray’s service was held, and cops in riot gear were captured on camera hurling rocks, along with tear gas canisters, back at their attackers, most of whom appeared to be teenagers.

Trouble started with rumors on social media about a “Purge,” referring to a 2013 movie in which crime was legalized, Police Commissioner Anthony Batts said.

After about 100 students heading to Mondawmin Mall were met by police, all hell broke loose. Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard. Officials also asked for an additional 5,000 law enforcement personnel for backup and announced schools will be closed Tuesday.

The Baltimore Orioles’ game against the Chicago White Sox was called off as several police cars had their windows smashed. Looters could be seen running out of a CVS pharmacy, which was later torched, a liquor store and other local businesses.

“I don’t know what we’re gonna do,” said Abid Ayub, 42, whose family’s 7-Eleven at the heart of downtown was looted. “Nobody showed up so far. The cops drive by. They don’t even wanna stop and see what happened.”

Hoodlums also attacked news reporters throughout the day. Early Tuesday, a Daily News staffer evacuated two journalists who were assaulted by rioters, with one having a bottle smashed in his face.

Mourners embrace as they wait in line outside Vaughn Greene Funeral Home for the wake of Freddie Gray. (Drew Angerer/Getty Images)

It was the latest — and by far most tense — round of fighting in streets since the 25-year-old Gray died April 19 following an encounter with cops that left him with a severed spine and crushed voice box.

On Monday, Gray’s family lawyer called on the Baltimore Police Department — and the six suspended city cops suspected of putting Gray in an early grave — to tell the world what happened.

“This is the moment to get at truth,” Bill Murphy told mourners at Gray’s funeral. “This is our moment to get it right.” Murphy also asked for prayers for Baltimore’s mayor, “who is struggling mightily with this,” a statement that brought more applause.

After the riots intensified, the lawyer said Gray’s family was “in shock” watching the violence and urged calm. NYPD chokehold victim Eric Garner’s daughter was among the more than 2,500 people packing New Shiloh Baptist Church who rose to their feet and applauded as one.

Peaceful protesters in the wake of Baltimore riots

“It’s like there is no accountability, no justice,” Erica Garner, 24, said afterward. “It’s like we’re back in the ’50s, back in the Martin Luther King days. When is our day to be free going to come?”

In New York, Mayor de Blasio said there have not been any related threats, and the violent demonstrators are “denigrating any possible notion of how to improve the situation, or bring police and community together, or get justice for anyone.”

Just hours after being sworn into office, U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch said the Justice Department continues to investigate Gray’s death and offered assistance in calming the violence.

“As our investigative process continues, I strongly urge every member of the Baltimore community to adhere to the principles of nonviolence,” she said.

People rally for support of Freddie Gray at his wake in Baltimore. (SHANNON STAPLETON/REUTERS)

Gray’s death exacerbated the already frayed relationship between the city’s African-American residents and police and exploded into a weekend of protests that turned violent at times.

Two hours before Gray’s funeral, mourners filed inside the church to pay their respects at his open casket, which was flanked by floral arrangements. Sobs echoed through the sanctuary and a projector aimed at two screens on the walls showed the words “Black Lives Matter & All Lives Matter.”

Five of the six officers who arrested Gray have been questioned and suspended with pay, but none has been charged with a crime. The Baltimore police commissioner has admitted that Gray should have gotten medical care, but police have not said how he suffered the spinal injury.

With Dan Friedman and Edgar Sandoval

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!