Officer still faces three charges in connection with death of Freddie Gray

Closing arguments have concluded Thursday in the trial of Baltimore police Lt. Brian Rice.

Complete coverage: Updates | Special section | Timeline | Officers charged | Charging documents | Who's who

Advertisement

Rice is the fourth of six officers to go on trial in the Gray case. He faces manslaughter, reckless endangerment and misconduct in office charges in connection with Gray's death.

The judge's verdict is expected to come down at 10 a.m. Monday.

The prosecution has dropped a misconduct in office charge and Baltimore Circuit Court Judge Barry Williams dismissed an assault charge. The 25-year-old Gray died April 19, 2015, a week after he suffered a neck injury while in a police transport van.

Rice is the officer who initiated the pursuit of Gray who was walking with two others in west Baltimore on April 12, 2015. Gray ran off after Rice made eye contact with him.

During four days of testimony, 12 witnesses testified for the prosecution and four testified for the defense.

The state argued that Rice, as the shift commander, should have been aware of the dangers in which Gray was placed after he was arrested and put in the van without being seat belted.

In her closing arguments, prosecutor Janice Bledsoe said Rice had a duty to ensure the safety of Gray.

"Lt. Rice's decisions cannot be be blamed on poor judgement or error," Bledsoe said. "It was an intentional act that started a chain leading to the death of Freddie Gray."

Prosecutors contend that Gray suffered his injuries sometime between the second and fourth stops made by the van before it arrived at the Western District police station. The state also pointed out that assistant medical examiner Dr. Carol Allan ruled Gray's death a homicide.

Bledsoe acknowledged the disagreements among medical experts about what caused Freddie Gray's death, but she said the court should strongly consider the testimony of Allan, who performed Gray's autopsy and was the only doctor who removed and examined Gray's spinal cord.

She said Rice had every reason to be aware of the new seat belt policy that had come down just days before Gray's fateful arrest. She said a reasonable police officer in Rice's position would follow the commissioner's memorandum, and that a reasonable officer wouldn't "act like a jerk when a citizen complains."

"If you believe the two citizens [Brandon Ross and Jamell Baker], then you will find Lt. Rice guilty," Bledsoe said.

Rice's defense team countered that Gray was injured after the fourth of six stops made by the van and that Rice had no contact with Gray at that point of the trip. The defense called witnesses who testified that Gray's death should have been ruled an accident.

"(Rice) was professional, correct, right and reasonable," defense attorney Michael Belsky said.

Belsky said the state did not ask one witness whether Rice's actions on the day of Gray's arrest were unreasonable because they would not be able to find someone to say so.

The defense added that what happened to Gray was "anything but foreseeable."

"The state did not prove through facts or evidence that a crime occurred," Belsky said.

Both sides in their closing arguments tried to paint different pictures of what occurred the morning of Gray's arrest. The state used CCTV video and images and cell phone photos to disprove the defense's claim that there was a chaotic scene with residents surrounding the officers while Gray was being combative.

"Lt. Rice had the power and control to punish and humiliate Freddie Gray for saying his handcuffs were too tight, screaming 'aaah and yo get off me.'"

The defense highlighted testimony from Officers Edward Nero, William Porter and Zachary Novak along with transcripts of cell phone videos where people can be hurt yelling obscenities and threats to police.

Williams questioned both sides during closing arguments, this included an exchange with Chief Deputy State's Attorney Michael Schatzow, who handled the rebuttal.

"You're saying failing to restrain equals a criminal act ?" Williams said. "Failing to seat belt is a crime. "

Schatzow responded by saying not seat belting Gray, combined with the totality of other events led to his death which should be considered a crime.

"What happened happened because (Rice's) actions were unreasonable," Schatzow said.

Legal experts believe that getting a conviction in Rice's case will be difficult. So far, no officers charged in connection with Gray's death have been found guilty.

"(The state's) position is almost strict liability," said defense attorney Warren Brown, a courtroom observer who is not connected with the case. "No matter what because he didn't belt him him , he committed a criminal act . The judge just wasn't feeling that at all."

University of Maryland law professor Doug Colbert said he believes the prosecution presented a strong case. He added that "it doesn't take a rocket scientist" to foresee that leaving Freddie Gray handcuffed and shackled in a police van without seat belting him could place him in imminent danger.

"It goes so much more than just not seat belting," Gray said. "The actions, the evidence shows that the lieutenant was in charge and that his orders left Freddie Gray lying on his stomach with his hands behind his back shackled being in a helpless situation."

Officer Caesar Goodson, the transport van driver, was cleared last month of all charges, including second-degree depraved heart murder. Officer Edward Nero was cleared of misdemeanor charges in May. Both Goodson and Nero opted for bench trials. The trial of Officer William Porter ended in December with a hung jury.

""The state has to get over that hurdle in persuading the judge that Lt. Rice was aware, was consciously disregarding the risk to Freddie Gray," University of Baltimore law professor David Jaros said.

WBAL-TV 11 News I-Team reporter David Collins, WBALTV.com digital editor Saliqa Khan and WBAL NewsRadio 1090 AM reporter Robert Lang contributed to this report