Updated at 9:06 p.m.

Police closed the Burnside Bridge and used pepper spray and flash bang grenades on demonstrators Friday evening after a May Day march deviated from its permitted route through downtown Portland.

The bridge was closed for about 30 minutes in the heart of the evening commute. Officers reportedly told marchers to leave the streets and continue on sidewalks but the unruly crowd refused.

Portland police tweeted that officers used pepper spray when some protestors tried to force their way onto the Burnside Bridge during rush hour.

By 5:45 p.m., hundreds of protestors had moved to Southwest Naito Parkway toward Pioneer Courthouse Square. Shortly after 6 p.m., police reopened the Burnside Bridge.

The rally disrupted traffic and mass transit into the evening, causing major delays for commuters. Shortly after 8 p.m., the agency announced that bus and light-rail service was being restored in the city center, but that riders should expect delays of as much as 45-minutes through 10 p.m.

About 6:45 p.m., more than 100 protesters skirmished with police again at Pioneer Courthouse Square, surrounding and banging on an unmarked SUV with officers inside. Eventually, officers on bicycles created a lane to allow the SUV to retreat from the scene. Police in riot gear then fired loud flash grenades to "allow police to safely withdraw from violent #MayDayPDX crowd," Portland police said on Twitter.

Noise distractionary devices being used to allow police to safely withdraw from violent #MayDayPDX crowd. -- Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) May 2, 2015

The crowd broke up about 7:30 p.m., effectively ending a day of protests that began hours earlier.

Throughout the day, hundreds of people took to the the streets of downtown to air grievances, promote causes, protest police violence and celebrate International Workers' Day in an amalgamation known as May Day.

May Day protests have become a Portland staple since 2000, when a march of more than 300 protesters had lingering repercussions. A police response overseen by Chief Mark Kroeker, an LAPD import,was blasted as heavy-handed, with more than 20 protesters reporting injuries at the hands of police. Controversy over the event sparked a city investigation and scathing criticism from Charlie Hales, then a city commissioner.

Though May Day demonstrations nationwide have long been associated with labor unions and workers rights, marches in recent years have broadened their message to address such issues as social justice, economic equity, immigration and police brutality.

That was the case in Portland, where separate rallies merged into a crowd of 500 or so marchers about 4:30 p.m.

The main May Day rally, focused on social and economic justice, started at 3 p.m. under sunny skies at Shemanski Park in the South Park blocks. Participants comprised several groups gathered under the "Rise Up in Solidarity" banner and featured both English and Spanish speakers.

According to organizers' Facebook page, "immigration status, race, ethnicity, gender identity, access to education, and other personal realities intersect and affect the way workers experience a range of injustices."

Meanwhile, Don't Shoot PDX launched its own event near Portland State University's Smith Memorial Student Union on Southwest Broadway.

Don't Shoot Portland, formed by longtime activist Teressa Raiford, has been a persistent voice on the use of excessive force by U.S. law enforcement since the deadly shooting of a teenager last year by police in Ferguson, Missouri. The death of Michael Brown, 18, sparked a national outcry and was followed by a string of other deadly police encounters across the country.

The march started peacefully enough, with roughly 250 people. "All night, all day, shut it down for Freddie Gray," they chanted, a reference to Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old who died in police custody. On Friday, prosecutors announced charges against six Baltimore officers.

As evening traffic grew thicker in front of the Multnomah County Courthouse, the Don't Shoot PDX crowd split the lanes, squeezing between idling cars in the street.

Adrienne Cabouet asked, "How many people must die in this system before we realize it was not built for us?"

A man stuck in traffic asked, "Who's Freddie Gray." He had heard of the Baltimore riots, though.

Mara Zusman, a Portland social worker who has been attending May Day rallies for years, said it seems like there are more movements to support now than in the past.

"I think there's a lot to celebrate, but there's also a lot of work and struggle, so it's cool to see these groups come together," she said.

#maydaypdx Tweets

Andrew Theen, Anna Marum, Tony Hernandez, Beth Nakamura and Melissa Binder of The Oregonian/OregonLive contributed to this report.

-- Joseph Rose

503-221-8029

jrose@oregonian.com

@josephjrose

-- Nick Budnick

nbudnick@oregonian.com

503-294-5083

@nickbudnick