Officer Edward Nero, 29, joined the police force in 2012. He earned a $44,773 annual salary in 2014 and lives in a Cape Cod-style home near Bel Air Middle School. An older man answered the door Friday afternoon and said it was "not possible" to talk with Nero and to "please leave the premises" and "don't come back."

Amy Brousseau, who is listed as jointly owning a home with Nero, had no comment when reached by phone.

His neighbor Krishna Pillalamarri said Nero and his wife moved to the area a few months ago and she has only seen him a few times mowing his lawn.

Public records indicate that he lived in Sewell, N.J., and the local high school, Washington Township, confirmed an Edward Nero graduated in 2004.

Nero was a volunteer firefighter between 2002 and 2012 with the Washington Township Fire Department in New Jersey, according to The Courier-Post, a New Jersey newspaper.

"I don't think he did anything wrong," the officer's father, Edward Michael Nero, told the newspaper Friday. "I'm sure he'll be acquitted," he added.

Baltimore Police Department Officer Edward M. Nero was charged with second-degree assault, two counts of misconduct in office and reckless endangerment. A second-degree assault charge and false imprisonment charge were removed. Officer Edward M. Nero was charged with second-degree assault, two counts of misconduct in office and reckless endangerment. A second-degree assault charge and false imprisonment charge were removed. (Baltimore Police Department) (Baltimore Police Department)

Gloucester County Fire Chief John Hoffman told the paper that Nero was "an outstanding and dedicated firefighter," adding that, "He was never in trouble. He was generally a good guy."

Nero was one of the three officers on bike patrol who made eye contact with Gray on North Avenue and Mount Street. He and Officer Garrett Miller began to chase Gray on their bikes and then apprehended him along the 1700 block of Presbury St.

The two officers handcuffed him and dragged him several feet away and held him face down on concrete. Nero and Miller did not respond when Gray asked for an inhaler. The arrest report indicates that the two officers found an illegal switchblade; however, Baltimore City State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby said the knife officers found was legal under state law.

Six Baltimore Police officers were indicted on May 21 on various charges related to the arrest and death of Freddie Gray. The indictments came nearly three weeks after Mosby announced criminal charges against the officers.

Nero was one of three officers who failed to establish probable cause and illegally arrested Gray, according to Mosby, and then failed to secure him with a seat belt, which is against a Baltimore Police Department procedure. Nero, Lt. Brian W. Rice and Miller then placed flex cuffs on Gray's wrists and leg shackles on his ankles at Mount and Baker streets.

The Associated Press contributed to this article.

crentz@baltsun.com

Edward Nero

Charge: Second-degree assault (up to 10 years)

Charge: Second-degree assault (up to 10 years)

Charge: Misconduct in office (no term listed)

Charge: Misconduct in office (no term listed)

Charge: False imprisonment (no term listed)

Profile: Officer Caesar Goodson

Profile: Officer William Porter

Profile: Officer Garrett Miller

Profile: Lieutenant Brian Rice

Profile: Sgt. Alicia White