Photo

WASHINGTON — The family of Freddie Gray, the 25-year-old black man who sustained a fatal spinal cord injury in police custody — setting off the worst unrest in Baltimore since 1968 — reached a $6.4 million settlement with the city on Tuesday, just days before a judge is to consider whether to move the trials of six officers facing charges in his death.

The tentative settlement, which must be approved by city leaders, was reached even before the Gray family filed an expected civil suit. In making the announcement, Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake said the settlement “should not be interpreted as a judgment on the guilt or innocence of the officers facing trial,” but had been negotiated to avoid “costly and protracted litigation that would only make it more difficult for our city to heal.”

But the police union pounced on the timing. The union president, Lt. Gene Ryan, issued a statement saying it was “obscene” to settle with the family before the officers went to trial.

Legal specialists said the $6.4 million was in line with settlements for recent racially charged police misconduct cases and might herald an era in which juries and city officials were inclined toward bigger payouts, given the national conversation over police treatment of African-Americans.

Photo

In July, the estate of Eric Garner, who died in New York after the police used a chokehold, a banned maneuver, to restrain him, settled with the city for $5.9 million. In Cleveland on Tuesday, just as the Gray settlement was being announced, a jury awarded $5.5 million to the estate of Kenneth Smith, a 20-year-old hip-hop artist who was fatally shot by an off-duty officer.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It used to be that we couldn’t even get fair play in these cases because the cards were stacked against us,” said Terry Gilbert, the lawyer representing the Smith estate. “But now there is a new mood in this country because of the police shootings. People are beginning to see there are serious problems with criminal justice.”