A neighbor of one of the officers charged in the death of Freddie Gray said Saturday that the officer was visibly saddened in the days after Gray died.

"I've been in my house crying — crying for her," said a neighbor of Sgt. Alicia White, one of six Baltimore police officers who was charged in connection with 25-year-old Gray's death, which came a week after his April 12 arrest.

"She was very sad," the neighbor, who did not want to be identified, said of White after Gray's death. "I didn't want to interfere, but I knew what was going on."

The neighbor described White as a "very nice person," and said the two often garden together and talk about life. "I don't think she did nothing wrong," said the neighbor.

Here's some more of what has been said and uncovered about White and the other officers charged Friday with counts including manslaughter, assault and misconduct:

Sgt. Alicia White

White, a 30-year-old African American woman, was the second most senior officer charged in Gray's death. She arrived on the scene of Gray's arrest after he had been detained and put into a police van. Baltimore State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby said that White didn't call for medical help when she encountered Gray, "despite the fact she was advised that he needed a medic." She is charged with involuntary manslaughter, second-degree assault and misconduct in office.

White has been with the Baltimore Police Department since 2010, according to the department. But the neighbor said White didn't flaunt that she was a police officer, and the only way she knew White's occupation is because she would sometimes see her in uniform.

Officer Caesar Goodson Jr.

Goodson faces the most serious charge in connection with Gray's death — second-degree depraved-heart murder, which could result in a 30 year sentence. He is also charged with involuntary manslaughter.

Goodson was driving the van that Gray was loaded into, and Mosby said Friday that Goodson repeatedly failed to put Gray in a seatbelt during the ride.

Two neighbors of Goodson, who is a 45-year-old African American man who has worked with the Baltimore Police Department since 1999, said he largely kept to himself. Friends of Goodson told NBC affiliate WBAL that he is a family man who works part-time as a car mechanic and enjoys watching football. An obituary for his mother, published in the Baltimore Sun in 2012, said his grandfather was also a police officer.

TOP: Baltimore Police Officer Garrett Miller, Sgt. Alicia White, Officer Edward Nero. BOTTOM: Baltimore Police Officer Caesar Goodson Jr., Lt. Brian Rice, Officer William Porter Baltimore Police

Lt. Brian Rice

Rice was the highest-ranking officer charged in Gray's death, and one of three officers who initially made eye contact with the 25-year-old before chasing him. Rice, a 41-year-old white man, has worked at the Baltimore Police Department since 1997. He is charged with involuntary manslaughter, second-degree assault and four other charges.

In 2012, a fellow Baltimore police officer, who had been romantically involved with Rice and was the mother of his then 6-month-old child, called the local sheriff's department over concerns about remarks he was making to her.

Reports released to NBC News by the Carroll County Sheriff's Department indicated that the call resulted in the seizure of a .40-caliber police pistol, a 9 mm handgun, an AK-47-style rifle, a .22-caliber rifle and two shotguns from Rice's house. He was also brought to the hospital by responding officers, but it wasn't clear what, if anything, he was treated for.

Officer Edward Nero

Nero, who also initially made eye contact with Gray, is a 29-year-old white man who has worked with the Baltimore Police Department since 2012. Before that, he spent a decade working as a firefighter at the Washington Township Fire Department in New Jersey, according to NBC Philadelphia. He is charged with second-degree assault and other counts.

Township Fire Chief John Hoffman told the station that Nero was never in any trouble during his time at the department, which began in 2002. "He was an outstanding and dedicated firefighter," Hoffman said.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Embed Six Baltimore Police Officers Charged in Freddie Gray’s Death 3:44 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

Officer Garrett Miller

Miller was the third officer who originally encountered Gray and chased him. He, along with Nero, pinned Gray to the ground and handcuffed him before loading him into the police van.

Miller, a 26-year-old white man who has been with the Baltimore Police Department since 2012, is charged with two counts of second-degree assault, two counts of misconduct in office and a count of false imprisonment.

Officer William Porter

Porter was involved in Gray's arrest after he had already been transported part of the way to the station in the police van. Mosby said Friday that Gray told Porter twice that he needed a medic, but one was never called.

Porter, a 25-year-old African American man who has been with the Baltimore Police Department since 2012, is charged with involuntary manslaughter, second-degree assault and other charges.

All six officers were booked and released on bond Friday evening. Their initial public court appearance is May 27. Mosby said that Gray's arrest was illegal and the switchblade that he was accused of carrying was a legal pocketknife. She also said that Gray's April 19 death was ruled a homicide.

Rice's attorney, Michael Davey, said Friday that Mosby committed "an egregious rush to judgment" in announcing charges so soon, and he said the officers did nothing wrong.