BALTIMORE - Concerns over violent protests led to a series of closings in the Baltimore area, and the Baltimore City Department of Transportation is warning motorists of heavy traffic.

This includes Monday's Orioles game against the White Sox, which has postponed. An announcement regarding a makeup date will be made soon.

RELATED: Freddie Gray unrest coverage

Meanwhile, Anne Arundel County Public Schools superintendent George Arlotto said Monday afternoon he is canceling all school field trips into Baltimore City through May 3 in light of the unrest in the city.

This affects about 40 planned trips by schools ranging from elementary to high school, officials said.

Baltimore City schools will also be closed Tuesday.

Commuters were warned of congestion Monday afternoon and evening in the vicinity of Mondawmin Mall and the downtown area, officials said.

Baltimore's water taxi service also shut down Monday afternoon in light of the protests, though Harbor Connector service was still available.

The University of Maryland Baltimore closed by 2 while Mondawmin Mall closed around 2:15 p.m. The announcement comes amid police concern for potential gang threats against law enforcement.

The following is the full statement from University of Maryland Baltimore:

Due to reports from the Baltimore Police Department (BPD) concerning scheduled activities today beginning at 3 p.m., UMB will close today at 2 p.m. at the recommendation of the BPD. These activities may be potentially violent and UMB could be in the path of any violence. The safety of our students and employees is of paramount importance please vacate the campus as soon as possible.

Other closings include:

T. Rowe Price, closed at 2 p.m.

Baltimore City Community College, closed at 3 p.m.

Baltimore School of Massage, closing Monday evening

Lexington Market, closed at 3 p.m.

National Aquarium, 4:30 p.m.

Coppin State University, afternoon and evening classes are closed.

Powell Recovery Center, Inc., evening group canceled

All Pratt Library branches closed just before 6 p.m. Monday.

We are working with our local and state law enforcement partners. We are asking all protesters to remain peaceful. #PeacefulProtest — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 2015

There is a group of juveniles in the area of Mondawmin Mall. Expect traffic delays in the area. — Baltimore Police (@BaltimorePolice) April 27, 201

Stay with ABC2 News for additional updates.