Taylor Street and Delvin Trusty began dating in high school after he sent her a message on social media. They attended prom together, and three years later were expecting their first child.

When she gave birth this month, she was surrounded with support, including Trusty's parents and brother, and her mother, sister and cousin — but not Trusty.

Their daughter, a 9-pound, 11-ounce girl named Avah, was born one month to the day that Trusty was gunned down in Northeast Baltimore. "I text his phone still," Street said. "I send pictures of the baby."

Trusty was among 45 people killed in Baltimore in July, a toll that matched the deadliest month in the city's modern history and came amid a surge in violent crime surge that followed Freddie Gray's death. The last time 45 people were killed in one month was in August 1972, when the city had about 275,000 more residents.

The deaths occurred across the city, overwhelmingly in historically impoverished neighborhoods. All but one of the victims were male, all but two of them black. Many had serious criminal records. The victims also included a 5-month-old boy and a 53-year-old grandmother, a teen stabbed to death in a dispute over a cell phone and a carryout deliveryman killed in a robbery.

They left behind scores of grieving relatives, including dozens of children and stepchildren who will grow up without fathers — a city's deadly legacy.

The Baltimore Sun sought to profile each of the victims, through interviews with relatives, friends, neighbors and police, as well as information on social media — and to chronicle the impact on those left behind.

Tamara Stokes hasn't been able to break to her young children what happened to their father, Robert Lee Jackson, 33, who was killed July 13 in East Baltimore.

Karl Merton Ferron / Baltimore Sun Taylor Street, mother of 6-day-old Avah Trusty, discusses the loss of her child's father in July. Taylor Street, mother of 6-day-old Avah Trusty, discusses the loss of her child's father in July. (Karl Merton Ferron / Baltimore Sun) (Karl Merton Ferron / Baltimore Sun)

"She doesn't even know that he's G-O-N-E," Stokes says, spelling out the word as her 3-year-old — one of two children they had together — babbles in the background at her home. "She doesn't know what's going on. She doesn't know that he was K-I-L-L-E-D."

Dechonne McNair, 22, tattooed a cross onto his arm in honor of his father, John F. Davis. The 48-year-old mechanic, who went by the nickname "Lucky," was gunned down near his Cherry Hill home on July 6. He had eight children.

"I still feel like he's still here sometimes. But he's gone," McNair said. "I miss my father."

The daughter of Damon Tisdale, 33, who was killed July 15 in West Baltimore, wrote a message in the program for his funeral at Perkins Square Baptist Church: "I miss you so much and I just can't take all this with me being so young Daddy. I love you so much.

"It hurts that you're not here to see me grow-up."

Dr. Geoffrey Greif, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Social Work, said growing up without a father can cause children to have questions about their identity, and seek out other role models. In many cases, they may find that in another relative, a coach, or pastor.

"But when positive role models are not there, sometimes it puts them at risk for getting involved with people that are not looking out for their best interests," Greif said. "Communities have to come together and help the children to realize that while this is a significant and very upsetting and huge loss, there are people in that child's life who are going to step up and try to support them."

Jahi Faw, an uncle of victim Shyteak Lawrence, said he's trying to be that role model for Lawrence's children, who came to his home on a recent weekend for a sleepover and to make S'mores. He wants to take them camping as often as possible, "just to get them outside of the asphalt living of the city, to give them another perspective on life."

"It's important to understand, we have to pay more attention to the people who are alive," Faw said. "I love [Shyteak] with all my heart, but I believe he's in a better place. If we're not telling people that we love them today, you may not have that chance tomorrow."

Myron Higgins grew up without a father but said he had filled that void with uncle Gregory Tavon Higgins, who, despite being incarcerated for 20 years, was always there for him.

"I just latched on to him. Even though he wasn't there physically, he was always there," Myron said. "He helped me change my life."

Gregory Tavon Higgins was released last year, and together they began pursuing business ventures including a trucking company, as well as producing music. During the protests over Gray's death, they grabbed a video camera and filmed a video for one of Myron's songs, a black power anthem called "Set It Off."

Higgins, 40, was fatally shot July 11 in East Baltimore.

"We were like one person," Myron said, "and I'm really trying to find my way, by myself."

The spike in violence began soon after Gray died in April from an injury sustained in police custody. In May, Baltimore recorded 42 homicides which at the time was the highest monthly total since 1972. That was surpassed by July's toll, and in August there has been an average of about one homicide per day. Already, the city has recorded more homicides this year than in all of 2014, when 211 people were killed.

In discussing the violence, city officials and police leaders have offered several theories. Among them: a dispute within the Black Guerrilla Family gang and the possible fallout in the illegal drug trade after pharmaceutical drugs were looted during the April riot.

A review of the July cases with police shows mostly petty disputes and cases being investigated as drug-related.