Rawlings-Blake said officials believed they had gotten the unrest that had erupted over the weekend under control “and I think it would have been inappropriate to bring in the National Guard.”

But later on, Baltimore Police Commissioner Anthony Batts made it clear events had become unmanageable. “They just outnumbered us and outflanked us,” Batts said. “We needed to have more resources out there.”

Batts said authorities had had a “very trying and disappointing day.”

Maj. Gen. Linda Singh, adjutant general of the Maryland National Guard, said up to 5,000 troops would be available for Baltimore's streets.

“We are going to be out in massive force, and that just means basically that we are going to be patrolling the streets and out to ensure that we are protecting property,” Singh said at a news conference Monday night.

The turmoil erupted in West Baltimore during the afternoon — within a mile of where Gray was arrested and pushed into a police van earlier this month — and by the end of the day spread to East Baltimore and neighborhoods close to downtown and near the baseball stadium.

The Orioles canceled Monday's game for as a safety precaution, and Baltimore's school board canceled classes on Tuesday.

U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch, in her first day on the job, said she would send Justice Department officials to the city in coming days. At least 15 officers were wounded in clashes after the earlier memorial service, suffering broken bones after demonstrators started throwing bricks and stones, according to authorities. Six officers remained hospitalized late Monday, police said.

Baltimore police Capt. Eric Kowalczyk said that one officer was “unresponsive” and that the attack took place “without provocation.”

Police responded with pepper spray, tear gas and riot shields, The Baltimore Sun reported. Hogan announced Monday evening that he was activating the state's National Guard to address the unrest.

“Today’s looting and acts of violence in Baltimore will not be tolerated," Hogan said. "I strongly condemn the actions of the offenders who are engaged in direct attacks against innocent civilians, businesses and law enforcement officers," he added, charging that violent acts “betray the cause of peaceful citizens seeking answers and justice following the death of Freddie Gray.”

The mayor declared a curfew across the city from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m. for the next week, curfew for adults beginning Tuesday night, with exceptions for work and medical emergencies — a curfew for children was already in effect. Officials requested up to 5,000 additional law enforcement officers.

Rawlings-Blake, a lifelong resident of the city, condemned the violence as she announced the curfew.

“Too many people have spent generations building up this city for it to be destroyed by thugs, who in a very senseless way, are trying to tear down what so many have fought for, tearing down businesses, tearing down and destroying property, things that we know will impact our community for years,” she said. “It’s idiotic to think that by destroying your city, you’re going to make life better for anybody.”

Gray's family said violence is not a way to honor him.

“I think the violence is wrong,” Gray's twin sister, Fredericka Gray, said late Monday. “I don't like it at all.”

The attorney for Gray's family, Billy Murphy, said the family had hoped to organize a peace march later in the week.