Buck Showalter, who will manage a big-league baseball game in an empty ballpark because of what has happened in Baltimore this week, asked a question on Tuesday afternoon about that game, and all that brought him and his team and even the country to a moment like this at Orioles Park at Camden Yards.

“Even though it’s not Sunday,” Showalter said, “do you still think we should play ‘God Bless America’ in the seventh inning?”

Then Showalter, who had already seen two of his games against the White Sox postponed this week because of the violence in pockets of Baltimore after the death of a young African-American man named Freddie Gray, a death of another African-American man by police in this country, said this from Baltimore:

“There’s a part of you that feels like you’re letting them win by doing this. Talking about idiots and not people protesting for the right reasons.”

Buck Showalter is not just one of the best managers of his time in baseball. He is not just an intelligent baseball man. He is fiercely intelligent, period, the son of a World War II veteran, and a man with strong, smart feelings about things, about his city and his country and a moment in this country where the Orioles and White Sox will play a ballgame in an empty park because the people who run his city are worried about their ability to keep fans who might have wanted to attend the game safe, even in the middle of a Wednesday afternoon.

Orioles manager believes things could still become worse between the police and citizens of Baltimore. (Greg Fiume)

RELATED: ORIOLES VP DEFENDS FREDDIE GRAY PROTESTORS

And you better believe Showalter understands why a series between the Orioles and the Tampa Bay Rays that was supposed to be played this weekend at Camden Yards is being moved to St. Petersburg.

“The police report (on how Freddie Gray died in police custody) could come out any day,” Showalter said. “And you better be prepared.”

He is saying that as bad as things have been this week in Baltimore, that they could get worse; that we might not have seen the worst of it, despite the burning of nearly 150 vehicles and 15 structures, including a CVS, and with nearly two dozen policemen injured, at least one of them critically. Baseball is still called the national pastime in this country. But we know better. Race is the national pastime, the main event, the third rail in America, as much now as ever.

Peaceful protesters in the wake of Baltimore riots

“I understand the desire for normalcy,” Buck Showalter said. “I get that. But I think we all understand that it’s going to take more than one baseball game to return this city to normalcy.”

So there he was on Monday night, before that night’s game between the Orioles and White Sox was officially postponed because of what was happening on the streets of Baltimore, explaining to his players that if the game did get called off, that he wanted them to get away from the ballpark and get home as soon as possible, because he wanted them safe.

“There were so many rumors and reports on who or what might be headed in our direction,” Showalter said. “So the ones doing the looting and the burning had accomplished their goal on having panic."

TIMELINE: SPORTS TAKE A BACK SEAT TO REAL WORLD ISSUES

So this is how it happens again in America, and the country looks like it has gotten no better or smarter on race than it was in Selma or Little Rock or Los Angeles after Rodney King: They shut down a city such as Baltimore, and act as if burning and looting somehow answers the questions about how Freddie Gray died, or honors the memory of a life cut short after he was hauled into a police van.

Before this it was Ferguson, Mo. There were protests, on streets and bridges, in New York City after the death of Eric Garner. Now Baltimore. It was Michael Brown in Ferguson. Garner died on the street in Staten Island. This time it is 25-year-old Freddie Gray, who ran from the Baltimore cops one night and got taken into custody and then got himself good and dead and made too much of his city explode.

Now, after all the noise and violence this week, after all the sirens and the scenes of burning cars and burning buildings, after the National Guard is called out to restore order and thugs have outnumbered eloquent and legitimate protestors, somehow another symbol of it all will be the empty stands on Wednesday afternoon at Camden Yards.

“I was just thinking about this,” Buck Showalter said. “If there’s a replay, do we show it on the big screen? For who?”

Freddie Gray's death is also at the center of the sports scene in Baltimore. (GAIL BURTON/AP)

Then Showalter was talking again, in a sad and tired voice, about people dying in police custody, about how much his owner, Peter Angelos, loves the city of Baltimore and is so saddened by what Baltimore, and the rest of the country and the world, have seen this week. And Buck Showalter remembered a time when his late father, a high school principal in Century, Fla., once emptied the gym for a basketball game because there had been fights the last time the two teams had played.

“So I come from a family,” Buck said, “that understands the kind of quiet I’m going to encounter (on Wednesday).”

I have known him a long time and like him a lot, and asked him on this day about whether he sometimes worries that things are getting worse in this country instead of better.

“You have to wonder about that sometimes,” he said. “Don’t you?”

He has managed a lot of games in his baseball life. He has managed the Yankees and the Diamondbacks and the Rangers and now the Orioles. So many days and nights of his life spent at ballparks all over America. Never one like the one he will have at Camden Yards, in Baltimore, on Wednesday afternoon.

So many pictures of Baltimore this week, sent out to America and the world, because of the death of Freddie Gray. Now Buck’s ballpark will be another. God bless America.

MOBILE USER? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!