''For years, we have lived under the reign of the machine gun,'' said Norma Corona Sapien, director of the Human Rights Commission of Sinaloa. ''The narcos thought they had protection and could act with impunity, so that's what they did, kidnapping and raping young girls, getting into drunken fights on the street, killing each other and generally acting as if they owned the city.''

No resident, no matter how affluent or influential, can be said to be truly immune from the rule by intimidation that the narcotics trade has imposed on this city of 600,000. Manuel Clouthier, presidential candidate of the conservative National Action Party in the election last year, is a native of Sinaloa willing to testify to that.

''On Valentines Day three years ago, a group of narcos a couple of blocks away held a party and were firing shots into the air,'' he said. ''I went to the police post on the street to ask them to do something, and when they wouldn't act, I called the police station, which didn't do anything either. The police were afraid of what might happen.'' Trafficking in High Schools

With marijuana and cocaine in such abundance here, it is hardly surprising that Culiacan has developed a drug consumption problem of its own. A state education official acknowledged this week that there is a ''strong marijuana traffic'' in high schools here, and parent groups at elementary schools have made similar complaints, even marching in protest.

Drugs were first cultivated commercially in Sinaloa during World War II, when the United States was cut off from its traditional Asian sources of the poppy flower used to make morphine.

Marijuana entered the picture in a big way somewhat later, again in response to the demand of the American market, setting the stage for the appearance of cocaine little more than a decade ago.

Most people here agree that the situation reached its nadir during the administration of Antonio Toledo Corro, who was governor from 1981 through 1986. The governor and Mr. Felix Gallardo were once members of the same wedding party, posing together publicly for pictures.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

According to American officials, Mr. Felix Gallardo also spent a time as the governor's house guest, which Mr. Toledo Corro has denied. When asked about his association with Mr. Felix Gallardo, the governor said he was ''unaware of any outstanding arrest warrants'' against the drug figure, though six such orders had been in effect since 1981.

''When the new administration took over in 1987, we found some police commanders to be narcos,'' said Eduardo Aispuro Beltran, a spokesman for the State Judicial Police. ''It was the most incredible and intolerable thing to find the police body to be completely infiltrated by narcos.''

But earlier governors also appear to have been at least partly aware of the problem - and to have failed to act. A business leader here tells of riding in a car with Mr. Toledo Corro's predecessor one day and having to pull to the side of a narrow highway to make way for a dozen or so open trucks hauling marijuana that was visible from the car.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

''I didn't do anything,'' the business leader said when he was asked what his response to the incident had been. ''I wasn't the governor and I certainly am not the police.''

Thus, while Mr. Felix Gallardo's arrest was cheered here, many of the state's most prominent citizens say the action will lose much of its impact if it is not accompanied by other prosecutions.

''They have moved against the narco traffickers, but let's see if they are willing to do the same to the narco politicians,'' a journalist said. Anonymous Death Threats

When asked if the government contemplated legal action against Mr. Toledo Corro, who has extensive business interests in the Mazatlan area, State Attorney General Manuel Lazcano Ochoa said that ''we are sure the investigation now under way by the federal government will clarify many things.'' But he added that, as of now, ''we do not have the elements'' to make a case.

The current Governor, Francisco Labastida Ochoa, campaigned on a law-and-order, anti-drug platform the traffickers appear to have taken seriously.

He received anonymous death threats during the campaign, state officials say, and has twice apparently been the target of assassination attempts.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In one incident, his official car was sprayed with gunfire as he returned home late one evening. Once an attempt was made to run his car off the road.

Other prominent enemies of the drug bosses have been less fortunate. Jesus Michel Jacobo, a crusading lawyer active in the Human Rights Commission, was killed late in 1987 by four gunmen, followed a few months later by Manuel Burgueno Orduno, a journalist who had written of links between drug traffickers and politicians. Suspects Celebrated in Songs

''He denounced things, he knew a lot, and he became an inconvenience,'' said Mr. Michel's sister, Carmen, of her brother. ''And the police have done nothing, and we don't have the means ourselves to investigate,'' said her father, Jesus Michel Salas, owner of an agricultural equipment business.

In 1986, more than 1,400 people were killed in Sinaloa, a remarkable figure in a state with a population of 2.6 million. That figure declined to 506 last year, in part because drug violence has now spread to neighboring states: two nephews of Mr. Felix Gallardo's, for instance, were reported killed just over the state line last month.

Mr. Felix Gallardo, like Rafael Caro Quintero and Ernesto Fonseca Carrillo, two other prominent cocaine-trafficking figures who are also in custody, lived in a humble part of town called Tierra Blanca when he first arrived in Culiacan from the countryside. Their rise is celebrated in songs played on radio stations here.

''I remember when he used to sell chicken and sausages from the back of his bicycle,'' Humberto Millan, an air-conditioning repairman who still lives in the old neighborhood, said of Mr. Felix Gallardo. ''He was very popular.''

The state government, Mr. Lazcano said, recognizes that ''here in Sinaloa a consequence of the drug trade has been a climate in which there is a high rate of common crimes'' and vowed to push ahead on all fronts. Many here, however, would argue that the government has no choice in the matter.

''Everybody knew all of these things were going on, but nobody did anything about it because they did not dare,'' Mr. Michel said. ''The president of the republic has been very brave in confronting the narcos, but he faces dangers now because of what he has done. He can't afford to turn back, or we all will suffer.''