Create an account or log in to see what your friends are recommending.

The Monitor

Like a knight in shining armor, a Mexican drug cartel is claiming that it will protect the public from kidnappings, extortions, robberies and other crimes.

La Familia Michoacana, a criminal organization known for its violence and its narcotics trafficking — mainly methamphetamine production — is looking to re-emerge under the name of the Knights Templar. La Familia Michoacana is a partner of the Gulf Cartel and the Sinaloa Cartel and has stepped up its presence in northern Mexico in its fight against the Zetas.

La Familia is also the main supplier of methamphetamine in the United States, according to U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration documents.

The announcement of the name change was made through several banners that were strewn through Mexico and through various online communiqués where a group claiming to be the Knights Templar said it would now be in charge of all activities previously done by La Familia Michoacana.

“Our commitment with society will be the: safeguarding of order, preventing robberies, kidnappings and extortions and to shield the state from rival organizations,” the banners stated.

La Familia Michoacana is an extremely violent drug trafficking organization involved in extortion, kidnapping and other criminal activities, according to DEA documents.

RE-BRANDING

The new name is nothing more than an attempt of the organization to re-emerge with a title that is typically associated with a charitable and benign group, said George W. Grayson, a professor at the College of William and Mary and author of Mexico: Narco Violence and a Failed State.

“It’s an interesting choice,” Grayson said. “The Knights Templar were known as a charitable organization in the 12th century and were even recognized by the pope in the 1130s for their good deeds.

“Also, they were the most vicious warriors in the Crusades,” he said. “That may be the message they are trying to send.”

While last year Mexican authorities announced the demise of the organization with the slaying of Nazario (El Chayo) Moreno, Grayson said that the organization is strong and spreading thanks to its alliance with the Sinaloa and the Gulf Cartel.

La Familia has operatives throughout the United States, including Houston, Dallas, Atlanta and various locations in California, according to DEA documents.

Because of the alliance La Familia has spread from its cradle in Michoacan to the states of Tamaulipas, Guerrero, Queretaro, Chiapas, Jalisco, Colima and others, reaching some areas as far as Baja California and Tijuana.

—

Ildefonso Ortiz covers law enforcement and general assignments for The Monitor. He can be reached at (956) 683-4437.