DEA: Late Mexican drug czar was bribed by cartels DEA: Bribes taint late Mexican drug czar





window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-3', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 3', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Photo: JAIME PUEBLA, AP Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Jose Luis Santiago Vasconcelos was killed in a plane crash in November. Jose Luis Santiago Vasconcelos was killed in a plane crash in November. Photo: JAIME PUEBLA, AP Image 2 of 3 Forensics workers investigate the Nov. 5 plane crash in Mexico City that killed drug czar Jose Luis Santiago Vasconcelos and Interior Secretary Juan Camilo Mourino. Forensics workers investigate the Nov. 5 plane crash in Mexico City that killed drug czar Jose Luis Santiago Vasconcelos and Interior Secretary Juan Camilo Mourino. Photo: Gregory Bull, AP Image 3 of 3 DEA: Late Mexican drug czar was bribed by cartels 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

A highly trusted former deputy attorney general, who later became Mexico’s drug czar and was embraced by Washington until his death, is accused in a U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration report of taking bribes from one of Mexico’s oldest narcotics trafficking cartels.

Jose Luis Santiago Vasconcelos, killed in November in a mysterious plane crash over Mexico City, is among three senior federal law-enforcement officials named in an April 21-page DEA briefing on organized crime and drug trafficking south of the border.

Vasconcelos was never charged with a crime. The other two are being prosecuted by Mexico.

The report, prepared as a primer on drug cartels, does not say when, or how much money was allegedly taken by Vasconcelos, who spearheaded counternarcotics efforts for President Felipe Calderon and had similar duties as deputy attorney general over fighting organized crime for Calderon’s predecessor, Vicente Fox.

He is alleged to have been snared by the Beltran Leyva organization, which the DEA report says is known to use bribery and assassinations to ensure its share of Mexico’s drug trade, and go “toe to toe” with larger syndicates.

Latest Houston & Texas News Now Playing: Now Playing Top sheet debate Fox 26 Houston

5 p.m. March 31 FOXRAD Forecast Fox 26 Houston

Deadly house fire in northwest Houston Fox 26 Houston

Clouds and rain return to North Texas Fox4

Chase ends when suspect's vehicle crashes into command station Fox 26 Houston

Boy, 6, struck by vehicle Fox 26 Houston

Suspect arrested who allegedly shot at officer Fox 26 Houston

Deviled eggs from Kulture Fox 26 Houston

Calas & Collard Dip from Kulture Fox 26 Houston

jonathan dancing with stars Fox 26 Houston

Bayou City Buzz - Gerald Green Fox 26 Houston

Defense attorney says pastor did not conspire Fox 26 Houston

Was That Fake? - clear parasites in water bottles Fox 26 Houston

10 p.m. March 30 FOXRAD Forecast Fox 26 Houston

Community remembers 8-year-old boy killed in drive-by shooting Fox 26 Houston

Lake Conroe temporarily closes to motorized boat traffic Fox 26 Houston

When contacted Wednesday, DEA spokesman Garrison Courtney, said the agency could neither refute nor offer a source for the highly charged allegation, which appears in the report as fact. The information was included without being fully vetted for release, Courtney said.

The Calderon administration declined comment.

Not above suspicion

Tony Garza, the former U.S. ambassador to Mexico who knew Vasconcelos personally, said he was respected and trusted, but not above suspicion.

“Countless times, U.S. agents told me of his bravery,” Garza said. “He was not, however, immune to the suggestion he was tainted.

“We heard it, and others did, too. It’s poker, you work with the hand you are dealt; make the most of it, and don’t bet the ranch.”

Three retired DEA agents, who held senior posts and knew Vasconcelos, said it’s hard to believe he was corrupt and noted it doesn’t take long to be smeared in Mexico.

“Jesus Christ could be named the head of a law-enforcement agency there and within hours they would be torching him and making allegations against him,” one of the former agents said.

Vasconcelos was behind many of Mexico’s highest-profile actions against the cartels, including extraditing Osiel Cardenas Guillen, the reputed head of the Gulf Cartel, who faces trial in Houston later this year.

The contention that Vasconcelos may have been corrupt stands as an example of why it has long been difficult for some U.S. officials to fully trust Mexican counterparts.

It comes as Mexico has increasingly sought to gain the trust of the U.S. in combined efforts to take on the cartels, including an initiative to give Mexico up to $1.4 billion for training and equipment.

The cartel that allegedly bribed Vasconcelos is described in the DEA report.

“Arturo Beltran-Leyva had a major influence in the government of Mexico with his ability to bribe high-level government officials including former Deputy Attorney General Jose Luis Santiago Vasconcelos ... ,” it reads.

Despite Mexican government officials saying the plane crash that killed Vasconcelos was caused by the wake of a large passenger jet, many Mexicans still believe it was a cartel hit.

There had been attempts on his life before.

Bribes, organized crime

Among the people killed in the crash was Interior Secretary Juan Camilo Mourino, who oversaw domestic security and was the highest- ranking member of the presidential cabinet.

Vasconcelos is the highest-ranking official named in the document as being corrupt.

The other two are former deputy attorney general Noe Ramirez and former secretary for public security commander, (Victor) Gerardo Garay. Ramirez is accused of taking $450,000 in bribes from traffickers. Garay is also accused of involvement with organized crime.

Don DeGabrielle, a Houston-based attorney who was the region’s top federal prosecutor, said he knew Vasconcelos and that he attended a meeting with U.S. and Mexican prosecutors in Mexico City last year.

"There — just like here — anybody that is ever accused of a crime ought to at least have the opportunity to defend themselves against those accusations,” he said. “There is no way he could do that now.”

dane.schiller@chron.com