The number of drug-related deaths is the subject of much dispute. Government officials last gave a figure — 34,612 — at the end of 2010, promising to update their tally regularly. They did not follow through. A group of Mexican and American academics, including Mr. Olson, began pleading with the Calderón administration for death figures, along with other data known to be collected, including violent episodes involving the military. But members of the group say they were ignored.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Pressure began to mount late last year as the government received several public records requests seeking information on crime-related deaths nationwide. The Calderón administration initially said that the data was confidential for reasons of national security, then last week the government said that the figures would be published after further study. The release on Wednesday came after Mexico’s freedom of information agency said it would ask for an investigation if the data was not released.

Now, the question is whether the report accurately reflects the reality on the ground. Some Mexican news organizations have arrived independently at similar totals, whereas others have found that the government regularly undercounts the number of drug-related deaths.

“Since there are very few actual investigations, those are approximations at best,” Mr. Olson said. “They’re hunches. There is not really a way of knowing precisely if it was caused by organized crime or a drug trafficker or not.” Molly Molloy, a librarian at New Mexico State University who closely tracks deaths in Ciudad Juárez and other parts of the country, said that given the investigative failures, the most reliable figures come from the Mexican census agency, which identified 67,050 homicides from 2007 through 2010, nearly double the government’s count of drug-related deaths for that period.

Inconsistent responses to The New York Times for requested public records from every Mexican state suggest that the data problems begin at the local level. The federal tally of drug-related homicides is at least partly a compilation of figures from state prosecutors’ offices, but these offices do not appear to have consistent systems for recording or releasing such data.

While some state prosecutors’ offices complied with requests for information on drug-related deaths, others denied tracking the most basic information, arguing it was the job of the federal government to do so. Veracruz, which has grown increasingly violent in the past few months, said in a letter that it “does not generate the statistic you request,” and furthermore, that the information was “reserved and/or confidential.”