But with no note by the killers to go on, the authorities consider the brazen attack to be a sign that all bets in the drug war may be off. The authorities detained three suspects last week in connection with the explosions but later released them. Mexico has a poor track record when it comes to catching and prosecuting killers, even in high-profile cases. What the Michoacán killing has laid bare is that there is no shortage of suspects who have access to military weaponry and the ruthlessness to aim it at a crowd.

Since taking office in December 2006, President Felipe Calderón has deployed 30,000 federal police and soldiers throughout the country to take on the traffickers. In the nearly two years since, his administration has boasted of the capture of numerous cartel leaders and the seizure of huge amounts of drugs and money. But the violence has spiraled only upward, especially the headline-grabbing massacres.

Innocents are being caught in the cross-fire more and more often, as in an attack in the mountain town of Creel in Chihuahua State last month when gunmen fired on a family gathering, killing more than a dozen people, including an infant and a 4-year-old boy. The authorities suspect the gunmen were seeking some of the men in the crowd.

Mr. Calderón’s government says that most of the goriest killings seem to be reprisals among traffickers and that the violence is a sign they are feeling the heat from the drug war and fighting amongst themselves. But while Mr. Calderón has vigorously defended his decision to bring in the military, he has noted that much of the violence stems from gangs expanding their “retail” sales within Mexico. He has also acknowledged that the chaos would probably outlive his presidency, and that fighting it would cost time, money and “human lives.”

“What are the alternatives?” he said in an interview. “Is the alternative to allow organized crime to take over the country?”

Still, with each bloody note left at the scene, the killers project their power.

“Why do you decapitate people?” asked Bruce Bagley, a professor at the University of Miami, referring to the decapitated heads and bodies that have turned up in the drug war. “They are doing this to intimidate authorities, other gangs and the civilian population. The bitterness of the fight has intensified. There’s a very unsettled and uncertain set of strategic alliances between these groups that are changing from day to day.”

Photo

The messages left at murder scenes, many of them full of errors in syntax and spelling, reflect this fragmentation of the cartels. “You get what you deserve,” said one note, left with four severed heads found over the summer in Durango State and believed by the authorities to be members of a rival cartel.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This is what happens to stupid traitors who take sides with Chapo Guzman,” said a different message left near five bodies in Chihuahua State and attributed to rivals of Joaquín Guzmán, leader of the Sinaloa Cartel who is better known by his nickname, El Chapo, which means Shorty.

The notes are sometimes aimed at the law enforcement officers trying to put the cartels out of business.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Let us work,” said a message left with 11 decapitated bodies found in Yucatán State last month, leading the authorities to speculate that the killings revolved around a business dispute.

A hit man who killed a police officer in Sinaloa State at the end of August left a note that said, among other things, “Ha, ha, ha.”

The notes are just the beginning of the cartel’s communication techniques. E-mail messages are sent to select journalists. YouTube videos are uploaded, sometimes with gruesome images that rival those put out by Al Qaeda. The cartels also commission songs about their supposed heroics that make it on the nightclub circuit.

Not all the messages, or narco-mensajes, as they are called here, can be read literally. Some are forms of disinformation, the authorities say, meant to send investigators off track.

Many, though, are proudly signed by the actual cartel involved in the killing, a form of bravado, the authorities say.

La Familia, which is not the least bit familial, was responsible for the five heads dumped in a bar in the town of Uruapán in 2006. “La Familia doesn’t kill for money, doesn’t kill women, doesn’t kill innocent people,” said a note accompanying the heads, believed to be those of dealers who crossed the group. “It only kills those who deserve to die.”

In Morelia, state officials received some ominous warnings a week or so before Independence Day suggesting that violence would break out. One of the threats, attributed to La Familia and telephoned in to the authorities, said that grenades would be used against soldiers during the military parade planned for Sept. 16, the day after the evening celebration.

The motive, the caller said, was to send a message to the soldiers who have been deployed in the state to back off, according to news reports. As it happened, the attack came a day early and was directed at civilians, not soldiers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

With the main plaza stained with blood and the population traumatized, the military parade was called off.