Abstract Mexico has cultivated opium poppy since before the 1900’s and has been an important transit route for South American cocaine for decades. However, only recently has drug use, particularly injection drug use, been documented as an important problem. Heroin is the most common drug used by Mexican injection drug users (IDUs). Increased cultivation of opium poppy in some Mexican states, lower prices for black tar heroin and increased security at U.S.-Mexican border crossings may be contributing factors to heroin use, especially in border cities. Risky practices among IDUs, including needle sharing and shooting gallery attendance are common, whereas perceived risk for acquiring blood borne infections is low. Although reported AIDS cases attributed to IDU in Mexico have been low, data from sentinel populations, such as pregnant women in the Mexican-U.S. border city of Tijuana, suggest an increase in HIV prevalence associated with drug use. Given widespread risk behaviors and rising numbers of blood borne infections among IDUs in Mexican-U.S. border cities, there is an urgent need for increased disease surveillance and culturally appropriate interventions to prevent potential epidemics of blood borne infections. We review available literature on the history of opium production in Mexico, recent trends in drug use and its implications, and the Mexican response, with special emphasis on the border cities of Ciudad Juarez and Tijuana. Keywords: Injection drug use, Opium, Heroin, Drug treatment, Needle exchange programs, Harm reduction, Interdiction, Mexico

1. Introduction With over 100 million people, Mexico is the third most populous country in the Americas, and one third of its population is under 15 years of age. Mexico has made impressive economic gains in the past decade; however, rapid industrialization and in-migration have led to poor sanitation and living conditions, especially in the 2000 mile long border region with the United States. A melding of political, cultural, and identity factors have made this area particularly vulnerable to substance abuse. Illicit drug use appears to have increased in Mexico over the past 10 years. Although the northern border was once considered primarily a passage way, drugs are increasingly being distributed and used in the northern region of Mexico (Cravioto et al., 2003; Magis-Rodriguez et al., 2002a; Medina-Mora et al., 2003). Parameters monitored by the National Council on Drug Addiction (Consejo Nacional de las Adicciones) such as history of lifetime use, exposure to drugs, age at first use, prevalence of current use, injection drug use, treatment admissions and drug-related deaths have shown a worsening trend over the past 15 years. Although the increase has been most dramatic in the northwestern region, this phenomenon is also seen in Northeastern Mexico, as has been documented in the 1988, 1993 and 1998 National Drug Use Surveys, particularly in large urban centers such as Nuevo Laredo and Monterrey (CONADIC, 1999). Of significance is the increase in injection drug use. Injection drug use is becoming a major public health problem, especially in the northwestern region from Chihuahua to Baja California (Magis-Rodriguez et al., 2002a; SSA, 1998). As described below, trends in opium cultivation and heroin production in some Mexican states may in part explain these observations; however, other factors such as recent increased enforcement along the U.S.-Mexico border, low street prices of black tar heroin, and the poor economy may be contributing factors. Although there is some evidence to suggest that health risks related to injection drug use in Mexico, such as HIV, have increased over the last decade, a sizeable body of empirical studies is lacking to describe the scope of the problem and inform the development of culturally appropriate interventions. Public health authorities have instituted a national addiction surveillance system [SISVEA, Sistema de Vigilancia de las Adicciones] (SSA, 1990) and have pilot-tested harm reduction activities, such as bleach distribution (Ramos, 2000), syringe exchange programs (Magis-Rodríguez, 2000), and methadone clinics, once considered unacceptable in this country. The purpose of this paper is to describe the historical context of opium cultivation and heroin production in Mexico and to document the Mexican response to growing problems associated with addiction, injection drug use and its associated harms. This paper focuses primarily on describing the response of the national government as opposed to that of local and regional governments and non-governmental agencies (NGOs); thus we do not provide a complete view of the Mexican situation. Our report also includes special emphasis on the northern border cities of Tijuana (adjacent to the U.S. city of San Diego, CA) and Ciudad Juarez (bordering the U.S. city of El Paso, TX), which are considered hot spots for heroin use in Mexico (DEA, 2003a). We initially performed a broad search of standard medical and social science databases (i.e., PubMed) using keywords such as injection drug use, heroin, drug abuse treatment, narcotics trafficking, needle exchange, HIV, Tijuana, Juarez, and Mexico. We then expanded our search to non-indexed major databases (i.e., LILACS), health and policy related websites maintained by the governments of Mexico and the United States, and abstract books of conferences (i.e., International Conference on AIDS). Officials from the Mexican Register of AIDS Investigations and Interventions were also consulted (CONASIDA). Finally, data was obtained from personal contacts with members of nongovernmental organizations, treatment centers, and pharmacies. Although we attempted a comprehensive review of the evolution of the current drug epidemic in Mexico by consulting multiple sources, we did not have access to the complete historical and bibliographic record. Many government and non-governmental agencies and organizations do not make their reports public or concentrate them in personal and private libraries. Despite these limitations, we attempt to lay the ground-work for describing the growing problem of opiate addiction in Mexico and call for a multidisciplinary approach to developing an appropriate response.

2. Historical context of opium cultivation and drug trafficking in Mexico Mexico has long been recognized as a major source of marijuana (Toro, 1995), but its role in poppy cultivation is less widely known. Poppy cultivation has existed in the northwestern Mexican state of Sinaloa since before the 1900’s. However, it was perceived that opium smoking was not commonly used among Mexican nationals and was instead used by “Chinese immigrants, artists and bourgeois degenerates” (Astorga, 1996). Historically, the drug situation in Mexico has been strongly influenced by external pressure and events, especially from the United States. For example, when the U.S. Congress passed the Harrison Narcotics Act in 1914, which tightly monitored and regulated the distribution and sale of narcotic drugs (Musto, 1998), the Mexican Civil Revolutionary War was taking place (Revolución de 1910). The Mexican government was preoccupied with maintaining control over the country and thus curtailing opium trafficking was not a priority (Astorga, 1999). Prohibition policies drove up drug prices in the U.S., making opium production and trafficking more lucrative in Mexico. Entrepreneurial individuals became involved in small-scale trafficking. With time, intensive drug enforcement practices drove many of these entrepreneurial traffickers out of business, benefiting larger, more organized gangs and cartels that continue to control the majority of narcotics trafficking in Mexico (Bellis, 2003). From 1916–1920, most drug trafficking in Mexico was taking place through the northwest border cities of Mexicali and Tijuana. Cultivation and commerce associated with poppy was legal in Mexico until 1926. In the 1930’s, opium smugglers expanded their routes to pass through the more central border cities of Nogales and Ciudad Juarez, making use of routes used to transport agricultural products exported via the U.S. southern Pacific railroad (Astorga, 1999). Drug policy and prosecution was transferred to the Procuradoria General de la República, P.G.R. [Attorney General’s Office] during the Lazaro Cardenas Administration from 1934 to 1940 (PGR, 2003). The drug trade boomed during the years post-World War II, during which time the Mexican state of Sinaloa was reportedly the only opium producing region in Latin America (Astorga, 1999). Since opium production was marketed for export (i.e., the United States), and there still was little evidence of a drug problem within Mexico, the drug trade appeared to be tolerated. During World War II, the mobilization of men by the United States to army bases on the border coincided with the development of local heroin distribution networks. In Ciudad (Cd.) Juarez, a well-known distribution network that lasted several generations began in the 1940’s. This network continued to be the main “transborder” supply of heroin for local consumers in the Cd. Juarez/El Paso area until the rise of “regional or national cartels” (Ramos, 1990). In the 1960’s, Mexico became a major supplier of drugs to the U.S., in particular heroin and marijuana, and to a lesser extent barbiturates and amphetamines. With the dismantling of some large Near East/French heroin smuggling rings in the early 1970’s, for a time Mexico was the leading supplier of heroin to the U.S. Remarkably, in 1974 Mexican drug dealers controlled at least 75% of the U.S. heroin market (DEA, 2004; Toro, 1995). In 1969, the U.S. government administration under President Nixon had officially singled out Mexico as the primary supplier of dangerous drugs to the U.S., including heroin, and implemented “Operation Intercept.” This consisted of meticulous car inspections for drugs at U.S.-Mexico border crossings, which caused a major disruption of transit across border crossings and signaled the beginning of a new era in U.S.-Mexico drug politics (Doyle, 2003). This intense interdiction had a significant local impact on the economy and drug scene in Tijuana and Ciudad Juarez. Historical reports suggest that the Juarez local consumption market continued to prosper during this period (Dr. M.E. Ramos, personal communication). Anecdotal reports suggested that heroin destined for the U.S. was also diverted to Tijuana, where a local consumption market was created in the 1970’s. In 1989, a study by the Centros de Integracion Juvenil (a federally-funded adolescent and young adult drug treatment system) claimed a 700% increase in the number of new heroin injectors in Mexico between 1976 and 1982, with up to a third of inmates having used the drug (Suárez, 1989). This situation bears some similarities to a report from South East Asia, where intense interdiction against opium trafficking and use, instigated primarily by European and U.S. pressure, occurred during the 1950’s and 1960’s. While opium production continued in rural mountainous areas, increased price of opium and prosecution of users in urban areas was associated with transition from opium smoking to injection of heroin in Hong Kong and Thailand (Westermeyer, 1976). In the mid-1970s, the political climate changed as Mexico-U.S. relationships were influenced by the oil interests discovered in southeastern Mexico in 1972. The Mexican government began a military operation against illicit crop production and trafficking of opium and marijuana with full cooperation of the U.S. government. This operation included the spraying of poppy and marijuana fields with paraquat, a defoliant herbicide that destroyed the plants (Anderson, 1981). Officials involved in this campaign noticed that fields would be harvested as soon as they were sprayed. This complicated matters, as the herbicide-drenched plants and drugs made their way to the U.S. drug market (Landrigan et al., 1983). Despite the massive scope of this campaign, it had limited success. Public and political pressure in the U.S. arising from reports of the contaminated drugs forced the interruption of this campaign and influenced the resignation of the top drug advisor to the U.S. government administration under President Carter (Anderson, 1981). An unintended response to this campaign was that Mexican opium poppy farmers moved their operations to tropical regions within the country and changed crop planting strategies, planting on steep mountainsides and narrow gorges and using the jungle canopy to hide crops (Stevenson, 2003). Opium poppy flourishes at elevations above 1000 m, making fields more difficult to detect. U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) officials also report that farmers over-plant by as much as 50% in order to compensate for eradication losses (DEA, 2000). In the 1980’s, the torture and murder of Enrique Camarena, a U.S. DEA agent stationed in Guadalajara, Mexico, signaled the start of the current chapter in the story of the drug trade in northern Mexico. This event underscored the fact that the political and social elite was no longer “untouchables” in Mexico (Astorga, 1999). Drug traffickers became richer, more powerful, and bolder. Their application of technological advances, finance, communications, and transportation in the pursuit of their illegal trade created an entrepreneurial style of drug trade intermingled with extreme levels of violence (DEA, 2002). In recent years, Mexico has had an important role in the production of high-quality, low-priced methamphetamine (DEA, 2003a). Additionally, Mexico is the largest supplier of marijuana to the U.S. and an estimated 70% of all South American derived cocaine passes through the Central America-Mexico corridor (DEA, 2003a). Furthermore, as described in more detail below, Mexico remains a major producer of opium and a major supplier of heroin to the U.S and its own consumer markets.

3. Recent trends in opium cultivation, heroin production and trafficking With the fall of coffee and corn prices and limited government assistance to farmers, poppy farming has surged in the southwestern Mexican state of Guerrero in the past decade. Opium gum sells for $700 to $1200 U.S. dollars per pound in contrast to coffee, which yields 15 cents a pound (Lloyd, 2003). It is therefore not surprising that increasing numbers of poor mountain farmers have changed their crops from coffee, which was once called “brown gold,” to opium. The Mexican government estimates that Guerrero state accounts for 51% of opium poppy grown in Mexico (Lloyd, 2003). Additionally, genetically-modified poppy plants in the northern States of Durango and Sinaloa can be over 5 feet tall with large bulbs that measure up to 2 inches in diameter (DEA, 2000). A single field can potentially yield three crops a year. Overall, Mexico has an annual net cultivation of opium poppy averaging between 3600 and 5000 hectares (DEA, 2003a). The growing association between Mexico’s economy and opium cultivation now overshadows revenues from the oil business (Bellis, 2003). Since opium is bulky and more inconvenient to conceal, it is most often refined into various forms of heroin. In 2002, the last year for which national estimates are available, Mexico produced an estimated 5.6 metric tons of pure heroin, slightly down from its average yearly output of 7.2 metric tons over the preceding 5 years (DEA, 2003a). According to the DEA, Mexican heroin accounted for 30% of the heroin sold in the U.S. in 2001 and approximately 98% of the heroin available west of the approximately midcontinental Mississippi River (DEA, 2003a), which is striking considering that the world leaders in heroin production are Burma, Afghanistan and Laos (UNODC, 2003). Most recently, there was a 78% increase in opium poppy cultivation, from 2700 hectares in 2002 to 4800 in 2003 (Green, 2004). The main form of heroin that Mexican drug labs traditionally produce is “black tar”, which is a poorly refined product that is typically injected. However, when Mexico became a transit point for purer white-powder Colombian heroin in the 1990s—a product that is more potent and can be snorted, some Mexican gangs began to apply similar techniques to refine the drug (DEA, 2003b). Since 1998, the price of Mexican black tar heroin in U.S. markets has almost halved, and there are reports that the powder form of Mexican heroin is on the rise (DEA, 2003b). These changes in heroin production, purity and price could potentially affect drug users’ behaviors and the subsequent risks of blood borne infection and overdose in Mexico and the United States. Black tar heroin has typically been the most common form of the drug in Mexico and in the western United States, whereas heroin powder has accounted for the vast majority of heroin used East of the Mississippi River in the U.S. (DEA, 2003a; Stevenson, 2003). Since black tar heroin is a solid, preparing it for injection requires heating the drug in a cooker, which depending on temperature achieved, can inactivate HIV and other blood borne viruses (Ciccarone and Bourgois, 2003; Clatts et al., 1999). In contrast, preparing heroin powder for injection does not require a heating step, and thus syringes and contaminated injection equipment may transmit blood borne viruses more readily. Differences in the preparation of heroin have been proposed as a possible explanation for the observed higher HIV incidence rates among injection drug users (IDUs) in the Eastern versus Western United States (Ciccarone and Bourgois, 2003). Although speculative, an increasing trend towards the production of heroin powder over less pure forms of black tar could be accompanied by increases in the number of heroin-dependent persons, higher overdose morbidity and mortality, and potentially increased incidence of HIV and other blood borne infections in both Mexico and the U.S. These trends should be monitored closely so that timely interventions can be implemented in both countries.

7. Conclusion Mexico’s role in the production and/or distribution of illicit drugs has long been recognized, but only relatively recently have signs of problem drug use begun to accumulate, especially in border cities such as Ciudad Juarez and Tijuana. Efforts to monitor trends in drug use through the national drug addiction epidemiologic surveillance system and survey on addictions will help to inform program planning and policy, but efforts at the state and local levels are also needed since national data likely mask heterogeneity in drug use patterns. Although the proportion of AIDS cases attributed to injection drug use has remained low in Mexico, ‘pockets’ of HIV infection may nevertheless occur and there is growing evidence of high-risk behaviors that could lead to widespread epidemics of HIV and other blood borne infections. Prospective studies are needed both to monitor trends in drug use and the incidence of blood borne infections, but also to evaluate the impact of existing and future interventions. In terms of program planning to reduce drug-related harm, a multifaceted approach is needed. Although methadone treatment has been available for over a decade in Mexico, it is not widely accessible. Efforts to expand methadone maintenance should be scaled up immediately, since this proven treatment is generally considered socially, politically, and legally acceptable in Mexico and elsewhere across the world. Since it is legal for IDUs to purchase syringes without a prescription in Mexico, efforts to identify IDUs’ barriers to the purchase of sterile syringes should be undertaken among IDUs, pharmacists and pharmacy clerks to ensure that IDUs need not resort to needle sharing. The acceptability and feasibility of harm reduction programs that may be considered controversial in Mexico should be further explored, which could include physician prescription of sterile syringes to IDUs, expansion of NEPs, and implementation of syringe vending machines and safe injection facilities. In past experiences in Mexico, interventions such as mass-media social marketing of condom use received strong opposition from conservative and religious groups in both the public and legal arenas (Rico et al., 1995). However, by working with conservative and religious groups, local human rights organizations, non-governmental agencies, and influential citizens, the development and implementation of successful prevention strategies can occur. Indeed, despite low coverage, the range of innovative prevention programs in Mexican border cities like Cd. Juarez is encouraging. Since 60% of the Latino population in the U.S. includes Mexicans and Mexican-Americans; many of whom cross the 2000 mile porous Mexican-U.S. border on a regular basis, there is a growing need for both countries to claim ownership over Mexico’s growing drug problem and intervene with culturally-appropriate interventions.

Acknowledgments J.B. is supported by a National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant (1 R01 MH065849-01A2). K. B. holds a Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award sponsored by the NIH (5 T32 AI07384). We gratefully acknowledge donor support for the Harold Simon Chair in International Health and Cross-Cultural Medicine. This research was funded in part by a 2004 developmental grant from the UC San Diego Center for AIDS Research, an NIH funded program #P30 AI36214-06 NIH grant 5 R01MH62554-03 and 3R01 DA009225-10S1. Funding for research by Programa Compañeros was provided by the National Institutes of Health (grant numbers 271-90-8405 and DA07234-07S1), the Carnegie Foundation through the Mexican Health Foundation and the Levi Strauss Foundation. In compiling the grey literature for this review, we appreciate assistance from Ms. Maria Elena Ramos Rodriguez (Programa Compañeros A.C.), Drs. Joao Ferreira-Pinto (Border Planning and Evaluation Group), Drs. Jose de Jesus Curiel Figueroa and Manuel Molina Bellini (from Profesionales Contra las Adicciones, A.C.) and Michelle Firestone (University of California, San Diego).