

Analyst warns failed state in Guatemala could augur drug cartel domination of Central America. US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Secretary Janet Napolitano reported a rare piece of good news late last week in the battle against runaway drug cartel violence on the Southern border. On Wednesday May 20, Napolitano said in a statement Thursday 630 kilograms (0.69 tons) of cocaine were seized by Mexican customs officials at Mexico City International Airport using screening equipment also utilized by DHS and training provided by US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). The seizure was part of the major transnational cooperative effort to combat international drug smuggling and deter drug-related violence along the US-Mexico border. “Over the past several weeks, we have stepped up our efforts to stop Southwest border violence at its source—the trafficking of drugs, guns and cash,” declared Secretary Napolitano. “This seizure illustrates how DHS is working closely with Mexico to share best practices and expertise to ensure that both countries are taking action to secure the border. As we strengthen relationships between DHS, Mexico and our state, local and tribal law enforcement partners along the border, we will continue to deter these illegal activities and make our countries safer.” The initiative Napolitano was citing was The President’s Southwest Border Initiative , announced on March 24, which deployed additional personnel and new technology along the US-Mexico border while emphasizing closer coordination with the Mexican government—including Mexican customs, in an attempt to reverse the pattern of escalating violence and deteriorating government control over drug cartels which has gripped Mexico and spilled over the US border. Within the last year, as reported in a widely read and nationally noted investigation in HSToday Magazine, there has been a dramatic increase in drug-related violence crossing from Northern Mexico across the US border. A House's Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security hearing's Escalating Violence in Mexico and the Southwest Border as a Result of the Illicit Drug Trade held on May 6, provides latest information on how border towns on the Mexican side have turned into literal war zones, with the Mexican police fighting for control with drug lords and their cohorts armed with military-grade weaponry. According to testimony heard at the hearing violence in the cartel fight for trafficking routes left at least 6,000 dead during 2008, including 500 police and soldiers. In addition more than 1,000 people have already killed in first few months of 2009. While the level of violence in the US has not escalated to that of Mexico, cities across the southwest US were also reported to be witnessing a ramp-up of drug-related kidnappings, extortion and murders According to the US Justice Department's National Drug Intelligence Center, 230 US cities have been listed as places the Mexican drug cartels have set up shop to distribute their drugs and conduct their criminal activities. Despite the glimmers of progress noted last week the situation in Mexico remains dire. Indeed, the very day Secretary Napolitano announced the successful raid the BBC reported that at a Mexican prison in the northern state of Zacatecas guards stood by as more than 50 prisoners, including some listed as dangerous by Interpol, walked out of a Mexican jail. The jail break, which occurred on May 16, involved 53 escapees, many linked to Mexico's notorious drug cartels. Prisoners, apparently with the complicity of guards, stole 23 guns from the jail before escaping. The incident is yet another indication of the extent of deep and systemic institutional corruption in Mexico which makes countering the cartels an uphill battle. As the US government focuses its attention on the Northern states of Mexico, however, an alarming report from the Brookings Institute titled 'Guatemalastan': How to Prevent a Failed State in our Midst , warns that, without proactive, timely efforts the kinds of cartel related chaos rampant in Mexico could quickly, and even more dangerously, spread throughout the Central American region. “When policy makers in Washington labeled Mexico a “failing” state, the Mexican authorities were rightly annoyed by the claim,” the Brookings report, authored by Kevin Casas-Zamora, a senior fellow in Brookings’ Latin America Initiative and former vice-president of Costa Rica, claims. “In fact, the experts may have missed their target by little, for the term would have been better employed in describing neighboring Guatemala.” Guatemala has long been a crucial transit point for north-bound narcotics. In this role the country has been helped by both geography and institutional make up. The thick unpopulated forests of Petén, in Northern Guatemala, according to the report, offers a haven to drug trafficking activities, often carried out under the complacent gaze, when not the active participation, of the only institution with effective presence throughout the Guatemalan territory: a military establishment riddled with corruption. Citing US Ambassador to Guatemala Stephen McFarland the paper estimates that approximately 300-400 tons of cocaine per year pass through the country. It also says that former Guatemalan President Oscar Berger publicly acknowledged his inability to guarantee the safety of any detainee in a Guatemalan prison. Berger’s admission, according to Casas-Zamora, clearly implied that Guatemalan law enforcement agencies could hardly be trusted. Further data supplied in the report corroborate that claim. According to Iberobarómetro 2008, a regional survey, only 25% of the Guatemalan population has any confidence in the police, while only 15% trusts the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court, in both cases amongst the lowest figures in the region. In the words of the report, “The penetration of organized crime in Guatemala adds a particularly combustive fuel to a mix that includes exceptionally high levels of inequality, very limited opportunities for a large marginalized youth, and the troubling inheritance of a four-decade long civil war. Predictably, Guatemala exhibits some of the world’s worst violence indicators. The homicide rate doubled from 23 murders per 100,000 inhabitants in 1999 to 45 in 2006, reaching 108 in Guatemala City, nearly 3 times as high as Baghdad’s current rate. As a point of comparison, the murder rate in the United States is currently 5.9 per 100,000 people.” Despite the efforts of the current President Alvaro Colom, now himself under investigation for his alleged role in the murder of a local businessman, Guatemala is faced with an increasingly intractable lawlessness syndrome, Casas-Zamora warns. “The weakness of the state, the pervasive violence, the widespread corruption, and the country’s strategic location for drug trafficking are creating a very dangerous cocktail,” he writes. Moreover, the prognosis is not favorable. “The situation on the ground in Central America is bound to deteriorate if the offensive of the Mexican government against the drug cartels succeeds in reclaiming control over Northern Mexico for the state,” the paper predicts. “Evidence of increased activity by Mexican crime syndicates, including turf wars between them, is rife throughout Central America these days. The big difference, of course, is that the capacities of the Central American states, and of the Guatemalan state in particular, to enforce the law and exert effective control over their territory are well below those of Mexico and certainly below what is needed to face up to the dire security challenge that is being foisted upon them.” As American authorities focus in a laser-like fashion on the immediate dangers in Mexico, Casas-Zamora concludes, Guatemala is experiencing “a silent institutional collapse.” Unlike Afghanistan or Somalia, its institutions seem to be failing slowly, in a non-conspicuous way, unnoticed by the headlines. “The United States and the neighboring countries, which are certain to be affected by the anomie that seems to be engulfing Guatemala, would do well to pay attention and commit resources to prevent this outcome” he implores . “ The approximately $10-20 million that have been allotted to Guatemala under the Merida Initiative to combat organized crime in Latin America are grossly insufficient to have any visible impact on the problem.”