Bodies of latest victims are pulled from a Veracruz canal as gangs intensify their campaign of terror against press

Gabriel Huge, Guillermo Luna and Esteban Rodriguez must have hoped they would be spared. Until last year, the three had been members of a tight band of journalists covering the drug war that has swamped the Caribbean port city of Veracruz.

Huge and his nephew Luna had worked on the local newspaper Notiver, Rodriguez with a rival publication, Diario AZ; but all three resigned in July after four of their colleagues were killed - one of them with his wife and one of his children.

The three photographers fled the city after hearing that their names were also on a hitlist, but soon returned. Luna came back last year and started working again at the Veracruz News, and Huge returned this year, as a freelancer, avoiding the crime beat. Rodriguez decided that enough was enough. He got a job with the electricity commission, according to Luna's mother, Mercedes Varela.

On Thursday night, their bodies were pulled from a canal behind a sewage plant with that of a fourth victim, Irasema Becerra, who reportedly worked as a secretary at a local paper. They had been tortured.

"They took away my two arms," Varela told the Guardian in a telephone interview referring to her son and Huge, her brother. "They had done nothing wrong."

Attacks on the press in Mexico have escalated since President Felipe Calderón began an offensive against organised crime in December 2006.

"Veracruz has seen a wave of lethal anti-press violence that is sowing widespread fear and self-censorship," said Carlos Lauria, of the US-based Committee to Protect Journalists. "The authorities must act now to end the deadly cycle of impunity in crimes against the press."

The latest murders came five days after Regina Martinez, Veracruz correspondent of the investigative national weekly Proceso, was found beaten and strangled in her bathroom in the state capital, Xalapa. Martinez was one of the few journalists in the area who still covered drug violence and corruption in any depth.

Huge was reportedly last seen when he returned home around midday on Wednesday to pick up his car. Luna covered a car accident about 3pm, but his colleagues raised the alarm after he failed to return from the job.

Varela said that she last saw her 22-year-old son when he left the home they shared on an assignment at about midday on Wednesday. She later found out that he had gone to cover the car accident, but then headed off on his own, telling his colleagues he would see them soon. They raised the alarm after they failed to locate him a couple of hours later.

Varela had also seen her now deceased brother that day. The 36-year-old Huge, who is survived by a young daughter, was often at his sister's home. On this occasion he dropped off his old car, left her the keys and also left his camera behind announcing he would be back soon. She thought he was just popping out to a local shop.

Huge, she remembers, had tried to help her persuade the younger Luna to change professions because of the danger and the fear that pervaded their lives but the younger photographer downplayed their concern.

"He always said that he hadn't done anything wrong and that he loved his job," she recalls. "My brother didn't have other options but my son could have worked at something else. He was trained in refrigeration too."

Varela also vaguely knew the other two victims found in the canal alongside her kin. Her daughter works in publicity at the local paper El Dictamen, where Becerra also worked.

Mexico's National Human Rights commission says 74 media workers have been killed since 2000. The Committee to Protect Journalists puts the figure at 51. The estimates vary according to who is defined as a journalist and whether their murder appears directly associated with their work. But whatever the numbers, few question that Mexico is now one of the world's most dangerous countries for reporters.

Those most at risk work for local outlets in parts of the country where rival cartels are fighting for control of smuggling routes and other crime rackets such as kidnapping and extortion.

In Veracruz, attacks on the press are part of an increase in violence which observers say began when a change in local government shook up the links between local politicians and organised crime. Drug war violence in the state pits the Zetas cartel against the Gulf cartel and the Sinaloa cartel, as well as the navy and state authorities. There is speculation that state-sponsored death squads are also involved.

Veracruz governor Javier Duarte expressed his outrage at the latest murders of journalists. "We repudiate these atrocities that hurt all of the people of Veracruz," he said.But none of the investigations into the murders of media workers in the state he governs have got anywhere. Self-censorship continues to be one of the few options available to reduce the risks. Most Veracruz media hardly covered the latest murders. The bodies were discovered on World Press Freedom Day. Notiver,the local paper with the most daring reputation, ran a story from Proceso that, based a few hundred miles away in Mexico City, is under less direct pressure.

"Self-censorship was extraordinarily strong but whoever killed these journalists wanted more," the Mexico-based representative of the Committee to Project Journalists, Mike O'Conner, told the Associated Press. "It still wasn't enough to satisfy whoever killed those journalists."

Veracruz appears to be following the state of Tamaulipas to the north, where local papers long ago stopped publishing almost anything about crime and corruption.

On Friday, nine bodies were found hanged under a flyover in the border city of Nuevo Laredo, in the north-east of the state, and another 14 were found decapitated outside a customs' office, their heads left in coolers on a pedestrian bridge. Local papers were still ignoring the news on their websites by the afternoon.In some cities in Tamaulipas cartel press attachés directly inform newsrooms what they can and cannot cover. Sometimes they even detail the words they want used.