Narcotics Rewards Program: Hector Beltran-Leyva

Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs



WANTED

ALIASES: "El Ingeniero," "El H"

DOB: February 15, 1965

POB: Sinaloa, Mexico

NATIONALITY: Mexican

CITIZENSHIP: Mexico

HEIGHT: 5 feet 10 inches

WEIGHT: 165 pounds

HAIR COLOR: Black

EYE COLOR: Brown



The Sinaloa drug trafficking organization is considered one of the most powerful and violent criminal organizations currently operating in the Republic of Mexico, with distribution cells throughout the United States. Through a union of groups, the Sinaloa cartel became responsible for the manufacture, acquisition, storage, importation, and distribution of multi-ton quantities of cocaine, methamphetamine, and marijuana from Mexico into the United States, as well as the transportation of millions of dollars from the United States to Mexico.



Although originally a part of the Sinaloa cartel, Arturo Beltran-Leyva broke ties with the organization in 2008 and established the Arturo Beltran Leyva (ABL) drug trafficking organization with several other former Sinaloa cartel members. Today, the ABL is responsible for the procurement of arms and ammunitions from the United States in furtherance of their criminal enterprise and is responsible for the trafficking of illicit drugs, including cocaine, marijuana, heroin, and methamphetamine. The ABL is also credited with rising rates of violence within Mexico, as they are reportedly responsible for kidnapping, torture, murder, and various other acts of violence against numerous men, women, and children in Mexico. The ABL’s enforcement arm, the Fuerzas Armadas de Arturo, is considered one of the most ruthless and brutal in the way they dispose of their enemies. The organization is connected with the assassinations of numerous Mexican law enforcement officials.



Hector Beltran-Leyva is the brother of Arturo Beltran-Levya and second-in-command of the ABL drug trafficking organization. He facilitates the planning, oversight, and overall control of the drug trafficking and money collection activities in Mexico City, Mexico, and oversees the control of drug trafficking corridors on behalf of the ABL. It is believed that Beltran-Levya is involved in the procurement and trafficking of multi-ton quantities of cocaine and marijuana into the United States. Beltran-Leyva is charged in a 2004 indictment in the District of Columbia and is also indicted out of the Eastern District of New York.



The U.S. Department of State is currently offering a REWARD OF UP TO $5 MILLION for information leading to the arrest and/or conviction of HECTOR BELTRAN-LEYVA.