Transcript of Copy of Narco-terrorism in Mexico

Implications

is important

Mexican Drug War

Geographical Facts

Background

International Action

Outcome

2001

2010

2005

2003

(cc) image by jantik on Flickr

This conflict is a result of fighting between very powerful rival drug cartels fighting for trade routes and control in Mexico. It has created an unsafe environment in the streets of Mexican cities due to its violence; military action has been implemented by the Mexican government to combat the cartels. The Mexican Military’s main operative is to dismantle the cartels. These groups have amassed so much power and money controlling the drug trade through Mexico into the United States, that they have corrupted government officials and act above the law.



Thousands have been dying every year in disputes between the cartels themselves and in battles against the Mexican Military. This combined with bribery and murder has made the politicians easily corruptible. Cartels Smuggle Drugs out and guns back in to Mexico, making this not only a problem in Mexico but in the USA as well.



Canada has felt its effects too, as there is an increase in gang violence in cities like Vancouver the last couple of years, as almost all of the cocaine in Canada is out of Mexico.





Cartels – Back in the 1980’s one man controlled all drug trade in Mexico and had trade routes throughout the US- Mexico border. His name was Felix Gallardo. He was the first drug kingpin to join his empire with the drug traffickers from Colombia and he oversaw everything. Once his control spanned across Mexico he decided to divide his power into different regions or cartels. He invited all of the top drug traffickers in his network to his house and gave them all a section to run. This created the Cartels that we see today. Gallardo was arrested in 1989 but the Cartels have stayed all this time, growing and sometimes making short alliances, but mostly staying bitter rivals. This has caused much violence as every Cartel jockeys for power and territory against each other.

Borders the United States, Belize, and Guatemala. The Gulf of Mexico and the North Pacific Ocean. In between the United States and Colombia making it the perfect trade route for cocaine smuggling.



Has a tropical to desert climate, terrain includes high rugged mountains, plains and desert.



1,964,375 sq km



One of the world’s major corn crops.



Lack of fresh drinking water and deforestation are major economic issues.



GDP- $13,900 (2010)



12.687 pesos per dollar, (2010)

Joaquin “Shorty” Guzman aka, “El Chapo” escaped from a prison in a laundry van. He is a powerful drug lord and builds a coalition of gangs to take control of Mexico’s drug trade.

2002

Ramen Arellano Felix, drug boss of Tijuana Cartel, killed by police.

Leader of Gulf Cartel, Osiel Cardenas captured after shootout with military.

2004

“Shorty” Guzman sends armed enforcers to the Gulf Cartel’s smuggling routes. But are sent packing after a vicious battle ensues.

Guzman goes after control of Tijuana. 1500 people are dead after the year as violence escalates.

2006

Killings spread to western Mexico, including Acapulco. Felipe Calderon takes office as president and increases military force. As a result of “Operation Michoacán,” against the La Familia Michoacán Cartel, 160 soldiers and police officers are killed, while 500 cartel gunmen are taken out. 2300 drug gang killings are reported. Torture rises, and things such as beheadings increase

2007

Cardenas, captured in 2003, is extradited to the US. President Calderon seizes 23 tonnes of cocaine in a historic raid. The US gets heavily involved promising 1.4 Billion in training and gear. 3,000 killed in the year, including popular singer Sergio Gomez.

2008

Shorty Guzman takes on another cartel, the Juarez. This becomes extremely violent and 6300 people die in Mexico that year as a result of violence. On December 21st seven off duty soldiers and a police commander were kidnapped, tortured and decapitated. Their heads were left at a mall with a note threatening the military.

2009

10,000 troops are sent to control the Ciudad Juarez district. US President Obama visits Mexico as violence has crossed the border into Arizona. Drug lord Arturo Beltran Leyva, head of the Beltran Leyva Cartel is killed by the navy. Drug war total killings reach 7,000 people. A report comes out that says that 90 percent of guns used in the cartels are from the United States, this brings back debate on whether an assault rifle ban should be implemented in America.– Gulf Cartel Hitmen dressed as police officers break into a prison and free 50 inmates.

Kingpin Teodoro “El Teo” Garcia Simental is captured by police. Murders of politicians, a car bomb and murders send the death toll this year to over 5,000 by mid June. Number 3 in control of “Shorty” Guzman’s cartel, Ignacio “Nacho” Coronel is killed. The Mexican Red Cross no longer treats gunshot wounds as it is caught in the crossfire. Mass graves are found throughout Mexico, bodies begin to turn up everywhere as 72 people are found dead in a ranch in Tamaulipas. 105 tons of marijuana is seized, street value of $338 million in Baja California on the way out from Mexico. As mayhem escalated all over Mexico the drug related death toll reaches a staggering number of 15,273, for 2010 alone.

2011

“El Chapo” leaves 28 bodies by a shopping centre 15 of them decapitated, and three messages to police. In the month of April alone 1,400 people are killed. That is the highest total to date in one month of fighting since this drug war began. Jose de Jesus Mendez Vargas is captured, leader of La Familia Michoacan. A casino in Monterrey is attacked; a group of armed gunmen killed 52 people as they opened fire on citizens and lit fire to all major exits with gasoline to trap the gamblers. This October the mastermind of the casino slaughter known as “ La Rana” was captured. In August 140 elementary schools in Acapulco and Guerrero closed and 600 teachers quit their jobs over death threats. This has left 75,000 kids not attending school this year. Too many killings, prison escapes, beheadings, death threats, mass graves and other forms of narcoterrorism have occurred to even report, and they continue to this day.

Timeline

K.B.

Narco-Terrorism: acts of terrorism to further advance drug traffickers

Political:

-Mexican Cartels have corrupted government authorities with large sums of money in order to advance their drug trade.

-A total of 28 mayors have been assassinated in Mexico since the war began.



Economic:

-Since drug trafficking brings in over US$50 billion in revenue, it accounts for about 65% of Mexico's economy.

-Mexico's tourist industry has fell by 15% since 2009.



Environmental;

-With all government money being spent on stopping the cartels, little is being done to maintain to quality of water and air. Also, densely populated cities like Mexico City are struggling to keep up with pollution.



Social:

-Mexico has fallen into a cycle of violence, costing thousands of innocent lives. in 2010 alone, more than 15 000 people have died.

-Thousands of residents have fled to the U.S illegally to escape to danger in Mexico.

-Many journalists have been killed in an attempt by the cartels to "censor" news. Hundreds more have received threats from the cartels.

- Action has been taken by the U.S. government as violence has spread into the border states of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona & California.

- The Obama administration has poured $1.4 billion into helping the Mexian governmment defeat the cartels

- In February 2011, the U.S. began launching unarmed drones in hopes of gaining intel.

- Many debates have arose over gun regulations in the U.S. as well as the legalization of marijuana to counter the cartels.

-Since newly-elected Mexican president Felipe Calderon launched the war against drugs in 2006, more than 35 000 Mexicans have been killed.

-More than 10 000 of these deaths have occurred in the Mexican state of Chihuahua - which includes Ciudad Juarez.

-185 Americans have died as a result of the drug war.

-Mexico could be on its way to collapsing as the economy is controlled by drug trade and the amounts of deaths is escalating every year.

A.W.

1. What 3 countries border Mexico?

a) Canada, Belize, U.S.A.

b) Colombia, Belize, U.S.A.

c) Colombia, Guatemala, U.S.A.

d) Guatemala, Belize, U.S.A.



2. How much revenue (US$) does drug-trafficking

produce a year for Mexico?

a) 5 billion

b) 15 billion

c) 50 billion

d) 65 billion



3. Which Mexican state has the most deaths since 2006?

a) Chihuahua

b) Durango

c) Guerrero

d) Sinaloa



4. Where do Mexican cartels get their guns

a) Their local Walmart

b) The back of a truck

c) U.S.A.

d) They make them



5. Which of these is a drug cartel?

a) Chalupa catrel

b) Gordita cartel

c) Quesadilla cartel

d) Gulf cartel

