Press Releases 08 President Bush Designates Beltran Leyva and his Organization Under Kingpin Act Statement by Ambassador Antonio O. Garza Mexico City, May 30, 2008 – “President Bush has designated four individuals and three entities, including Marcos Arturo Beltran Leyva and the Beltran Leyva Organization, as subject to the sanctions under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act ('Kingpin Act'). This action underscores the determination of the United States to do everything possible to pursue drug traffickers, undermine their operations, and end the suffering that trade in illicit drugs inflicts on Americans and other people around the world. “Beltran Leyva and his organization comprise a major part of Mexico's Sinaloa drug cartel, with operations on both coasts of Mexico and along its southern and northern borders that move significant quantities of cocaine into the United States. His hit squads are responsible for scores of deaths and heinous violence. Marcos Arturo Beltran Leyva and members of his family have been indicted in both the United States and Mexico for cocaine smuggling. “The Kingpin Act, which became law in December 1999, targets significant foreign narcotics traffickers, their organizations and operatives worldwide, denying them access to the U.S. financial system and all trade and transactions involving U.S. companies and individuals. The Kingpin Act does not target the countries in which these foreign individuals and entities are operating or those countries’ governments. It does allow the United States to freeze the assets within the U.S. of anyone who is designated, take action against any U.S. person for doing business with a designee, and deny visas to designated individuals and their immediate family members who have knowingly benefited from the designated individuals’ illicit activity. “The decision to designate Marcos Arturo Beltran Leyva and his organization will provide the United States with additional tools to dismantle his operations, deprive him and his cohorts of resources, and prosecute them in the United States.”

A complete list of all individuals and entities designated since June 2000 can be found at www.treas.gov/offices/enforcement/ofac/. Below please find the White House Press Release:



For Immediate Release

Office of the Press Secretary

May 30, 2008 Presidential Designation of Foreign Narcotics Kingpins Today the President designated four foreign individuals and three foreign entities in the ninth annual set of determinations of drug traffickers who will be subject to the sanctions provided in the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act ("Kingpin Act"). This action brings the total number of individuals and entities designated under the Kingpin Act to 75 since the first designations were made in 2000. This action underscores the President's determination to do everything possible to pursue drug traffickers, undermine their operations, and end the suffering that trade in illicit drugs inflicts on Americans and other people around the world, as well as prevent drug traffickers from supporting terrorists. We appreciate the support and cooperation often provided by host governments in making these designations, and this year in particular, the Government of Italy with respect to the 'Ndrangheta Organization. The Kingpin Act, which became law in December 1999, targets significant foreign narcotics traffickers, their organizations, and operatives worldwide, denying them access to the U.S. financial system and all trade and transactions involving U.S. companies and individuals. The Kingpin Act does not target the countries in which these foreign individuals and entities are operating or the governments of such countries. The additional foreign individuals and entities the President has designated this year as appropriate for sanctions under the Kingpin Act are: Haji Asad Khan Zarkari Mohammadhasni (Afghanistan) Hermagoras Gonzalez Polanco (Venezuela) Cumhur Yakut (Turkey) Marcos Arturo Beltran Leyva (Mexico) Beltran Leyva Organization (Mexico) PKK (KGK, Kongra-Gel, formerly Kurdistan Workers' Party) (Turkey) 'Ndrangheta Organization (Italy) The initial list of drug kingpins was released in June 2000; the above names will be added to that list. ###

