Those whose murders Mr. Garcia Abrego is accused of ordering include disloyal subordinates, commercial adversaries, crusading journalists, hostile witnesses and romantic rivals. Many victims, like the two-month-old baby killed by mistake when the reputed trafficker's gunslingers sprayed a Matamoros home with automatic rifle fire in 1991, have been complete innocents.

Eduardo Valle, a senior Mexican Government investigator who pursued Mr. Garcia Abrego in 1993 and 1994, said the reputed trafficker was careful to isolate himself from killings. "He never gave instructions personally to his triggermen," Mr. Valle said.

Killers in many cases included Tamaulipas state and federal police officers, Mr. Valle said. The policemen were among hundreds of Government officials, including a deputy attorney general, to whom Mr. Garcia Abrego is said to have paid millions of dollars in monthly bribes.Mr. Valle and others contend that the reputed trafficker's ties to the Government of former President Carlos Salinas de Gortari went even higher.

Whether such matters will be discussed during his trial is not clear. During Mr. Garcia Abrego's first interview with Federal Bureau of Investigation agents in Houston last month, he said he "would be glad to answer any and all questions" the agents asked him, the F.B.I. says. But his lawyer, Roberto Yzaguirre, said his client was not cooperating with prosecutors and would plead not guilty.

Asked about accusations that Mr. Garcia Abrego had ordered murders, Mr. Yzaguirre's assistant, Michael L. Sinder, said, "We don't intend to discuss Mr. Abrego's life with anybody."

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Garcia Abrego's reputation for brutality first emerged in 1984, when he was a 39-year-old multimillionaire, the head of one of Mexico's rising drug gangs. During a battle for control of the Matamoros border with a rival trafficker, Casimiro Espinosa, one of Mr. Garcia Abrego's aides ambushed and badly wounded Mr. Espinosa.

At dawn the next day, May 17, 1984, gunmen in camouflage uniforms burst into the Raya Clinic, a private hospital where Mr. Espinosa was convalescing. During their 10-minute attack, they fired off 300 rounds, killing a guard, a husband and son who were visiting their ailing mother, a bedridden 35-year-old woman, and Mr. Espinosa's sister.

Mr. Espinosa survived the mayhem, but died of his original wounds days later.

Two years later, Ernesto Flores, 48, the editor of El Popular, then the largest-circulation daily in Matamoros, and a reporter, Norma Morena, were slain. Gangsters waiting at the newspaper entrance blasted the journalists' car with gunfire, then killed them with shots to the face.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One of Mr. Garcia Abrego's assistants, who took refuge in the United States later, said publicly that Mr. Garcia Abrego -- irritated by El Popular articles -- had ordered Mr. Flores's murder.

In 1991, a hired gunman named Armando Barrera took refuge in Brownsville and in a sworn deposition accused Mr. Garcia Abrego of ordering the murder of his brother and 35 other people. Most of the victims were shot to death, but some were tortured, burned alive or tied up and hurled into rivers, Mr. Barrera said.

Months after lodging his accusations, Mr. Barrera was gunned down in Brownsville.

Despite the seemingly endless bloodletting in Matamoros, there has been little protest about Mr. Garcia Abrego's presence. Hundreds of millions of dollars in drug proceeds have filtered back into the local economy, and people associated with him own banks, farm machinery and auto dealerships, clothing and shoe stores, real estate and construction companies, hotels, restaurants, seed companies, gas stations and farms, according to court testimony and interviews here.

In a city that was at once so bloodied and so compromised, community leaders -- politicians, lawyers, journalists -- have largely remained silent about the narcotics violence, said a Matamoros lawyer who spoke on condition of anonymity.

"What do you do in a city like this?" the lawyer said. "You keep quiet."

But Mr. Garcia Abrego's arrest has encouraged some new candor. On the day after his expulsion from Mexico, the headline in PM, the afternoon newspaper in Matamoros, read: "An End to 10 Years of Narco Terror!"