In early April, Mexico had noticed that it had high numbers of serious respiratory illnesses and some deaths. It began sending samples to Canada and the United States, asking for help genotyping the new virus.

The ages of the victims in Mexico also concern health officials. Unlike typical flu seasons, when infants and the aged are usually the most vulnerable, none of the initial deaths in Mexico were in people older than 60 or younger than 3 years old, a spokeswoman with the World Health Organization said. Pandemic flus — like the 1918 flu and outbreaks in 1957 and 1968 — often strike young, healthy people the hardest. When a new virus emerges, deaths may occur in healthy adults who mount the strongest immune reactions. Their own defenses — inflammation and leaking fluid in lung cells — can essentially drown them from inside.

A second hypothesis, Dr. Cetron said, is that there is some other factor in Mexico that increased the lethality of the virus, such as co-infection with another microbe or an unwittingly dangerous form of treatment.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

For example, a co-infection with the AIDS virus makes it much more likely that someone with tuberculosis will die of it. And Reyes syndrome emerged when infants with fevers were treated with aspirin.

However, Dr. Cetron emphasized that there is no evidence of any co-infection in Mexico or anything unusual about flu treatment there.

Flu experts would also like to know whether this year’s flu shots give any cross-protection against the new swine flu strains. There is an H1N1 human strain in this year’s flu shot, and all H1N1 flus are descendants of the 1918 pandemic strain. But flus pick up many mutations over the years, especially when they move back and forth between humans, pigs, birds and other hosts.

There will be no evidence for several days as to whether the shots are protective, until the C.D.C. can get stored blood samples with antibodies to the flu shot and test them against the new virus. Those tests are under way now, according to a flu expert who sent the C.D.C. his blood samples.

In several countries, students reported they were ill upon returning from spring break in Mexico. For example, three teachers and 22 students at Rangitoto College, a New Zealand high school near Auckland, were reported to be ill after arriving after a three-week trip to Mexico on a flight via Los Angeles.

Mexico’s annual flu season was trailing off in March, when there was a new spike in cases. That usually happens when B strain flus peak late in the season, but B strains are usually mild. Mexico sent samples to the United States and Canada after its officials realized the country was having an unusual outbreak with severe cases.