We report on a large U.S. case series of hospitalized patients with 2009 H1N1 virus infection during the first 2 months of the pandemic. The pandemic strain of H1N1 virus caused severe illness, including pneumonia and ARDS, and resulted in ICU admissions in 25% of patients and death in 7%. Although underlying medical conditions were common in the 272 patients we evaluated, we also identified severe illness from H1N1 virus infection among young, healthy persons. Antiviral drugs were administered to most patients, but such therapy was started more than 48 hours after the onset of illness in a majority of the patients. Delayed initiation of antiviral therapy may have contributed to an increased severity of illness.

In contrast to peak periods of seasonal influenza, when influenza hospitalizations are more common among persons 65 years of age or older and those under the age of 5 years,7 during the period of our study, almost half the hospitalizations involved persons under the age of 18 years; more than one third of the patients were between the ages of 18 and 49 years, and only 5% were 65 years of age or older. Possible explanations for this phenomenon include the fact that children are more likely to be exposed in schools, the young have a greater susceptibility to the virus (as compared with persons >60 years of age, on the basis of serologic studies12-14), and young, febrile patients are more likely to be tested, since older adults with influenza often do not have fever.15

The clinical features of patients who were hospitalized with 2009 H1N1 influenza were generally similar to those reported during peak periods of seasonal influenza and past pandemics with an acute onset of respiratory illness.15-18 Whereas diarrhea or vomiting have occasionally been reported in children and in less than 5% of adults during peak periods of seasonal influenza,15 these symptoms were reported in 39% of patients in our study, with no significant difference between children and adults. Studies are ongoing to determine whether the transmission of the 2009 H1N1 virus can occur from exposure to virus shed in stool.

In a pattern that was similar to that in patients with seasonal influenza, the patients in our study had a high prevalence of underlying medical conditions (73%). Eighty-two percent of the patients would be considered at increased risk for influenza-related complications on the basis of age (<5 years or ≥65 years) or the presence of an underlying medical condition. The proportion of children who had an underlying condition (60%) was higher than proportions that have been reported for children who were hospitalized with seasonal influenza (31 to 43%).9,19,20 In published studies and unpublished CDC data, 44 to 84% of adults who were hospitalized with seasonal influenza had an underlying condition.21-23 The upper end of this range is similar to the proportion of hospitalized adults in our study who had an underlying condition (83%).

As in patients with seasonal influenza, asthma and COPD were the most common underlying conditions in the patients we studied.9,19-23 Although few patients had neurocognitive or neuromuscular disorders, children in our study were disproportionately affected by these conditions and were at increased risk for severe influenza. The 7% prevalence of pregnancy in our study was higher than the expected prevalence in the general population (1%).24 During periods of seasonal influenza and past pandemics, pregnant women have been at higher risk for influenza-associated morbidity and mortality.24-28

Although data regarding height and weight were available for only 70% of patients in our study, 45% of these patients (including 18 children) were either obese or morbidly obese. A majority of these patients (81%) had an underlying condition associated with an increased risk of influenza-related complications. The prevalence of obesity among the adults in our study (29%) was similar to that in the adult U.S. population (27%).29 However, the prevalence of morbid obesity (26%) was higher than the estimated 5% in the adult U.S. population.29 Although obesity has not been linked to an increased risk of influenza-related complications, further investigation is warranted.

Few bacterial coinfections were detected, but bacterial diagnostic tests were not performed in all patients; most patients received antibiotics near the time of culture collection, which could have reduced the diagnostic sensitivity. Data on pediatric mortality associated with influenza in the United States have shown an increase in the rate of bacterial coinfection, from 6 to 24% between 2004–2005 and 2006–2007; the majority of these infections were caused by methicillin-resistant S. aureus.30 The implications of such trends for 2009 H1N1 influenza are not yet clear.

In our study, a significant proportion of hospitalized patients had findings on chest radiography that were consistent with pneumonia, and the majority had bilateral infiltrates. Although it is difficult to precisely determine the cause of pneumonia from radiographs, during the 1957–1958 influenza pandemic, Louria et al.18 reported findings of diffuse bilateral infiltrates in patients with primary influenza viral pneumonia, whereas lobar infiltrates were seen in patients with secondary bacterial infections. Better studies are needed to correlate radiographic findings with the cause of pneumonia during influenza outbreaks. In our study, only 73% of patients with radiographic evidence of pneumonia received antiviral drugs, whereas 97% received antibiotics. In the absence of accurate diagnostic methods, patients who are hospitalized with suspected influenza and lung infiltrates on chest radiography should be considered for treatment with both antibiotics and antiviral drugs.10

The majority of 2009 H1N1 viruses that have been tested at the CDC to date have been susceptible to two neuraminidase inhibitors, oseltamivir and zanamivir, and resistant to two adamantanes, amantadine and rimantadine.2,3,31 Recent guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommended the use of antiviral drugs in adults and children who are hospitalized with seasonal influenza, regardless of the underlying illness or influenza-vaccination status.10 Current interim CDC guidelines for pandemic and seasonal influenza recommend the use of either oseltamivir or zanamivir for hospitalized patients with suspected or confirmed influenza and for outpatients who are at high risk for complications.32 Although the evidence of a benefit of antiviral therapy is strongest when treatment is initiated within 48 hours after the onset of illness, a prospective cohort study of oseltamivir therapy in hospitalized patients with influenza indicated a reduction in mortality, even when such therapy was initiated more than 48 hours after illness onset.23 Recent data from Thailand also showed that oseltamivir therapy was associated with survival in hospitalized patients with influenza pneumonia.33 Under an Emergency Use Authorization, the FDA recently approved oseltamivir therapy for 2009 H1N1 infection even if it is initiated more than 48 hours after the onset of illness and also approved its use in children under the age of 1 year.32

Data from our study suggest that the use of antiviral drugs is beneficial, especially when initiated early, since patients who were admitted to an ICU or died were less likely to have received such therapy within 48 hours after the onset of symptoms. Despite the absence of definitive data regarding clinical effectiveness, treatment with antiviral drugs should be initiated in hospitalized patients with suspected 2009 H1N1 infection, even if such therapy is initiated more than 48 hours after the onset of symptoms, especially in patients with pneumonia and outpatients who are at increased risk for complications, including pregnant women.

Our study has several limitations. The patients we evaluated represented 25% of total hospitalizations for 2009 H1N1 infection that were reported to the CDC during the surveillance period that ended on June 9, 2009, and they represented most of the states with substantial influenza outbreaks during that period. Participation in the study was voluntary and was therefore subject to reporting bias. We evaluated only patients with confirmed 2009 H1N1 infection, so the group may not be representative of hospitalized patients who may not have been tested. All diagnostic testing was clinically driven, and tests were not obtained in a standardized fashion. Finally, despite the use of a standardized data-collection form, not all information was collected for all patients.

Clinicians should consider influenza, including 2009 H1N1 infection, in the differential diagnosis for patients presenting with fever and respiratory illness or pneumonia. Empirical antiviral treatment for hospitalized patients with suspected influenza or pneumonia and for outpatients who have underlying medical conditions or who are pregnant should be considered. The benefits of treatment are probably greatest when such therapy is started early, but antiviral drugs should not be withheld if patients present more than 48 hours after the onset of symptoms. As the 2009 H1N1 pandemic evolves, continued investigation is needed to better define the clinical spectrum of disease and risk factors for an increased severity of illness, which will allow for improvements in treatment guidance.