We found that children were twice as susceptible to infection with the 2009 H1N1 virus from a household member as adults 19 to 50 years of age and that adults older than 50 years of age were less susceptible than younger adults. This suggests that the young age distribution that was observed among reported cases in the community (the index patients in our study) was not an artifact resulting from case-ascertainment bias. In addition, our findings are consistent with serologic analyses of the 2009 H1N1 virus suggesting that there are some preexisting pandemic H1N1 immune responses in the elderly; these are present to a lesser extent in younger adults but are rarely present in children.7 Susceptibility as measured in this analysis captures social and hygienic, as well as biologic, determinants.

Previous studies showed that infectivity was greater among children than among adults during seasonal influenza outbreaks8-11 and during the 1957 pandemic,12-14 but the difference was not as pronounced during the 1968 pandemic.13 However, our analysis did not provide evidence that infectivity was associated with the age of the patient, although the index patients in our analysis may not represent an unbiased sample of all community patients. No symptom was found to be significantly associated with increased infectivity; but the power to detect a difference was low in the case of some symptoms, since some of the symptoms were highly prevalent; for example, almost all cases (92%) involved cough.

The average secondary attack rates (13% for acute respiratory illness and 10% for influenza-like illness) were at the lower end of the range of rates that are seen with seasonal influenza (for which the range is 10 to 40%8,15-19), but in households with two members, the rates could be as high as 28% for acute respiratory illness and 23% for influenza-like illness. Our estimates of transmissibility in households, which are lower than estimates from previous pandemics12-14 and show a strong association with age, are consistent with and complement findings from analyses of transmissibility in the early phase of the epidemic in Mexico, which were based on aggregate population data.20

In a household study of seasonal influenza in France, the secondary attack rate was found to be approximately constant with household size.8 In our study, there was a relatively sharp reduction in secondary attack rates between households with two members and those with four members, after which secondary attack rates were approximately constant (Figure 1A). These differences are intriguing and highlight the fact that the sociologic, environmental, and biologic mechanisms available to explain the relationship between secondary attack rates and household size are still limited.

In a sensitivity analysis (see the Supplementary Appendix), we found that key findings were robust with respect to changes in the main modeling assumptions. The age patterns observed in the data cannot be explained solely by a difference between community risks for adults and children. The key findings would be unchanged if the case definition were influenza-like illness rather than acute respiratory illness, although the transmission rates would be somewhat lower.

Studies that rely on the identification of an index patient in the household have important limitations. First, index patients may have more severe symptoms than are usual with the illness, and given that severity may be predictive of transmission, estimates may not be representative of typical cases. Second, ascertainment of households may be subject to selection bias; households may be more likely to enter a study if they have more cases, a factor that would also upwardly bias the secondary attack rate. To reduce the potential of this bias to affect the estimates in our study, we excluded households in which the index patient was not the first case patient in the household. Although our analysis controls for a range of covariates, other important covariates may be missing (e.g., coexisting conditions or antiviral treatment or prophylaxis in household contacts). If any of these covariates are correlated with age, for example, there might be a confounding of the effects of age on the risk of transmission.

Censoring of the data is another limitation. In our study, the duration of household follow-up was only 7 days. Although our estimation procedure accounts for this censoring, it does so by assuming a functional form for the serial interval distribution, which determines the probability associated with the (unobserved) tail of the distribution. Our estimates of the serial interval should be interpreted in this light.

Although these limitations are important, it would be difficult to investigate household transmission at such an early stage of the pandemic with alternative “community study” designs, in which a cohort of households is recruited before infection of any of their members and is followed throughout the course of the pandemic. Such a study would require very large numbers of households to achieve sufficient power for inference.

Another limitation of our study is that secondary cases were not confirmed by laboratory testing. It is therefore likely that some of the secondary cases were not cases of 2009 H1N1 influenza. Conversely, some of the household contacts with symptoms that did not meet the definition of acute respiratory illness or influenza-like illness were likely to have had 2009 H1N1 influenza. In general, the positive predictive value of acute respiratory illness for 2009 H1N1 influenza infection in persons who are not epidemiologically linked to a case patient is expected to be low. However, the probability that an acute respiratory illness is caused by the 2009 H1N1 virus is expected to be higher when the onset of symptoms occurs only a few days after the onset of symptoms in a household case patient with laboratory-confirmed 2009 H1N1 influenza. It is possible that the lack of laboratory confirmation of secondary cases biases the estimates of susceptibility among children, for example, if children are more likely than adults to receive a false positive clinical diagnosis of 2009 H1N1 influenza.

The epidemiologic factors estimated here should inform recommendations regarding the isolation and quarantine of infected patients and permit the effect of early treatment versus delayed treatment to be estimated.21,22 Our estimates of age-specific susceptibility also provide useful information for guiding public health policies that target specific age groups — policies such as school closures and vaccination efforts. In particular, our results underscore the critical role children play in the unfolding pandemic.