Don't call it 'swine flu,' farmers implore

Hog farmers, already hurting from the recession, say paranoia about the H1N1 virus has devastated their business.

"Every time I turn on the TV, they're talking about it: swine flu," said Moody, 46, from his farm about 10 miles east of Ames, Iowa. "Come on, how hard is it to say H1N1?"

It doesn't seem to matter that the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has stated that the disease is spread by humans, and is impossible to get from eating pork or standing next to a pig.

Like many pork producers across the heartland, he has spent months railing against the term "swine flu," which he says has caused so much fear that the bottom has fallen out of the pork market.

Not that he would ever call the pandemic H1N1 influenza virus by its colloquial name.

Reporting from Nevada, Iowa — Hog farmer David Moody has stopped letting strangers into his barn because he's afraid they'll infect his pigs with swine flu.

Dale Brinker checks on his hogs in Auxvasse, Mo. The H1N1 virus has been a… (Jeff Roberson / Associated…)

The spread of the swine flu -- er, H1N1 -- has left in its wake a public relations nightmare for the nation's 67,000 pork producers.

Since April, when the virus was first reported, the industry has lost about $1.5 billion, according to the National Pork Producers Council.

The losses have come on top of two rough years for the pork industry, hit hard by rising feed costs and slackening demand due to the recession.

Moody, who grew up on a hog farm, can't remember a time when things were this tough. His profits are down, his feed costs are high and the heating bill for his hog barns is growing.

He glanced out the front window, past the pig wind chimes and the grinning Porky statue standing guard at the front door, to the low-slung metal barns lined up alongside his front yard. The sound of 600 grunting sows mixed with the patter of falling rain.

"It's been two years of red ink," said Moody, who declined to talk about the specifics of his family's finances. "There was a chance things could have turned around earlier this year, until H1N1 hit. After that, it went from bad to worse."

What riles Moody is that the virus, which has killed about 4,000 people this year in the United States, is only tangentially related to his beloved pigs.

The H1N1 virus is related to one common in North American pigs but also contains genetic pieces from birds and humans. The actual swine virus in pigs is harmless to humans. What makes it dangerous is the mutated combination of the three main genetic pieces.

The scientific evidence, however, has meant little to a world fearful of this new disease.

In Egypt, the government killed 300,000 pigs in the mistaken belief that the animals spread the disease. In Afghanistan, the country's one known pig was ordered quarantined because of similar fears.

Twenty-six countries temporarily banned the export of pork from North America, even though cooked pork is perfectly safe. Other big consumers, such as Mexico, stopped taking orders altogether as fearful consumers just stopped eating pork.