Thousands of protesters marched against Islamophobia and United States President Donald Trump in downtown Toronto on Saturday — the second major demonstration this week. The massive rally began outside the U.S. Consulate on University Ave. as protesters, bundled against the cold, stretched from Queen to Dundas Sts. Hundreds had gathered five days earlier to protest Trump’s sweeping travel ban targeting seven predominantly Muslim countries — which was blocked by a U.S. judge on Friday. Organizer Hashim Yussuf, of Black Lives Matter, estimated that at least 5,000 people protested outside the consulate on Saturday. “It’s a call to action that has just begun,” Yussuf said in an interview. “The stuff that is happening now is not OK and we will fight back.”

Demonstrators holding placards take part in a protest against U.S. President Donald Trump outside the U.S. Embassy in London on Feb. 4, 2017. ( NIKLAS HALLE'N )

Article Continued Below

As dozens of RCMP and Toronto police officers stood by, speakers at the rally — called a Day of Action Against Islamophobia and White Supremacy — demanded the Canadian government immediately denounce Trump’s travel ban. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau stopped short of directly condemning the executive order this week, but did tweet in support of Canada’s diversity immediately after Trump implemented the ban. Standing on the back of a pickup truck, speakers told the crowd that Canadians must not be smug about racism at home, reading out the names of the six men killed in the recent shooting at a Quebec City mosque. They also spoke about Canada’s record on indigenous land rights, police shootings of black men and prejudice against gay and transgender people. Gilary Massa, of the National Council of Canadian Muslims, spoke about Islamophobia and Muslim fears after the Quebec killings. “We are tired, we are hurt, we are afraid and we have sadness and anger,” Massa said. “How do we look at our children and tell them we belong here?”

Matwali Abdelsalam holds up a copy of the Quran at the National Day of Action Against Islamophobia on Feb. 4, 2017, while speakers read out the names of the men who died in the Quebec City mosque attack. ( Andrej Ivanov )

After a few hours on University Ave., protesters marched across Dundas St. to Yonge St., down to Queen St. and back to University. Shoppers and tourists pulled out their cellphones to record the protesters, who chanted, “All of us or none of us” and “Hey hey, ho ho, Donald Trump has got to go.” Anthony Oliveira said he joined the rally to tell the federal government that “Canada needs to do something … We need to be more protective of immigrants.”

Read more about: