Shortly after President Trump's inauguration, a Twitter account named "Rogue POTUS Staff" sprung up. The page is among several anti-Trump "rogue" accounts from federal organizations, such as the the "Alternate" National Park Service:

Don't just add us to your follow list. Take action- Write, call, organize & find ways to make a difference for the causes you believe in. https://t.co/ewCDnti2n6 — AltUSNatParkService (@AltNatParkSer) January 29, 2017

This newer profile joins a Twitter ecosystem where the National Park Service Twitter account came under fire last week for criticizing Trump administration. Soon after, federal agencies were ordered to restrict their social media communications.

The week-old Rogue POTUS Staff account, which describes itself as the "unofficial resistance team inside the White House" has already amassed over 400,000 followers. Many of their tweets detail what Trump allegedly says behind closed doors in the White House:

Pres. Trump doesn't quite understand the difference between being POTUS and being a business owner. Keeps asking "who says I can't?" — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 26, 2017

POTUS fully overwhelmed after full week on the job. Things spilling over into out of office lives for everyone. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 29, 2017

Others seemingly foreshadow what the president will do:

Rumors are true. Expect by end of the week. https://t.co/Mx89ZaY4ND — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 30, 2017

Check out other tweets from the Rogue POTUS Staff

10 PHOTOS Rogue POTUS Staff Twitter account See Gallery Rogue POTUS Staff Twitter account Bannon says to take POTUS at his word. Probably has more to do w/ his attempts to control WH over Priebus. Not believed to know anything. POTUS fully overwhelmed after full week on the job. Things spilling over into out of office lives for everyone. POTUS fuming after judge order last night. Suggested having agents to "do it anyway" & ignore order. Preibus said to be at wits end. POTUS instead removed the wrong people from NSC and inserted Bannon. Concern is that POTUS will take ready, fire, aim approach to for pol. POTUS insists that if they don't confess sites, they'll be denied entry. Doesn't seem to recognize that there would be no way to know. Attempts to get POTUS to work on policy failed. Retreats to residence, skulking over McCain/Lindsey announcement and public protests. POTUS not pleased with Priebus using @MeetThePress appearance to promise green card change that POTUS rejected. Feels his hand was pushed. VP Pence argued that neither would entertain question. But point that convinced POTUS was concern about press coverage if it got out. Trending office joke: Last week he wanted more media attention, this week he wants less. Maybe next week he'll go on vakay & leave us alone. When well intended patriots disagree, that's democracy. When POTUS says it's not fact until he approves it, that's tyranny. Up Next See Gallery Discover More Like This HIDE CAPTION SHOW CAPTION of SEE ALL BACK TO SLIDE

In the case of a rumored LGBT executive order, Trump announced Tuesday that he will strive to protect LGBT workplace rights. The "Rogue POTUS Staff" account claims this is was due to public pressure:

After the enormous pressure from the past several days, POTUS repudiates VP, reverses course on LGBT EO. #resistwinhttps://t.co/F5T1QrIiEh — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 31, 2017

The account asserts people running the profile must keep their identities secret in order to keep their jobs. They say that they "will block anyone who asks us to ID ourselves (including press), or who makes suggestions of violence." Whether the account has any validity is unclear.

More from :

Pope Francis wants the media to stop focusing on 'bad news'

Newsweek retracts story praising assault on white nationalist Richard Spencer

Attack on conservative news website Drudge Report builds mystery around perpetrator