CLOSE Thousands of people take to the streets of London to protest against President Donald Trump's anti-immigration decree and his potential state visit to Britain. Video provided by AFP Newslook

People hold signs and flags at a rally in front of the Stonewall Inn in solidarity with immigrants, asylum seekers, refugees and the LGBT on Feb 4, 2017 in New York. (Photo: Bryan R. Smith, AFP/Getty Images)

DENVER — Tens of thousands of protesters again took to streets across the country and around the world Saturday to criticize President Trump’s executive orders, cabinet picks and overall agenda.

Some of the biggest protests took place in New York City and Washington, D.C., with large rallies planned in San Francisco and Los Angles later in the day.

Organizing under the social media hashtag #NoBanNoWall, protesters said they wanted to again demonstrate their commitment to protecting vulnerable communities.

Demonstrations also took place in St. Louis, Denver, Toronto, Salt Lake City, Austin and Philadelphia, and a large gathering clogged streets in front of the U.S. embassy in London. The protests, while at times blocking traffic or inconveniencing tourists, remained peaceful by Saturday afternoon.

New Yorkers don't care how you love, worship, or identify. If they come after you, they'll need to get through every one of us. #Stonewallpic.twitter.com/EVfr9vQgVH — Bill de Blasio (@NYCMayor) February 4, 2017

In New York City, a large crowd gathered at the Stonewall National Monument, prompting Mayor Bill DeBlasio to tweet a picture of the crowd and a blunt statement: “New Yorkers don't care how you love, worship, or identify. If they come after you, they'll need to get through every one of us.”

It was the third Saturday in a row since Trump’s inauguration that protesters flooded streets, public parks and plazas to express displeasure with the new president's agenda.

Many protesters say they’re particularly worried about the potential loss of rights for LGBTQ people, and for refugees from war-torn Muslim countries subject to Trump’s travel ban. Many were heartened Saturday by a federal judge’s ruling Friday that temporarily halts the ban nationwide.

Small protests also took place at airports around the country.

“Beautiful scene today,” Toronto protestor Alex Mazer posted on Twitter. “Marching against hate, intolerance, & Islamophobia.”

Saturday evening, an estimated 2,000 protestors gathered in front of the Trump Tower in West Palm Beach for a march that would take them near Trump's Mar-a-Lago club, which has become known as the Winter White House. The president and first lady Melania Trump are expected to attend a Red Cross ball at the club Saturday night.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2kAsVNq