The limousine that was set on fire during the anti-Trump anarchist protest in downtown Washington on Inauguration Day is owned by a Muslim immigrant who says the damage could cost his company $70,000.

Muhammad Ashraf, the owner of Nationwide Chauffeur Services, spoke with the Washington Examiner's sister publication, Red Alert Politics, about what happened:

In an exclusive interview with Red Alert Politics, Ashraf said he wasn't a supporter of Donald Trump during his campaign, but Friday's protests were completely counter-productive.

"I have a different point of view," Ashraf told Red Alert. "I did not agree with many of the things he said, but that still does not give me the right to go and affect someone's livelihood."

Ashraf noted that the Women's March on Washington and in other cities around the country was a model for how to peacefully protest.

"I really don't think we need to take this [violent] route."

Ashraf's employee, Luis Villarroel, 58, was dropping a client off at their destination when things turned ugly. Protesters smashed doors and windows in the vicinity, but then turned their attention to Villarroel and the limo. People began pounding on the car and started throwing stones and bricks in his direction. The driver ended up going to the hospital for cuts on his hands and arms from glass being shattered by thrown projectiles. […]

"[We've] been in business for over 25 years and this is the first time this has happened," Ashraf said.

Ashraf explained that with the loss of the vehicle, his company is now in the hole for $70,000 (if insurance doesn't cover riots) plus commission and the medical bills for his driver.

Oh my. Limo on fire on D.C. amid the violent protests. FD just showed up pic.twitter.com/X8Xg7R5ooO — Steve Kopack (@SteveKopack) January 20, 2017



A GoFundMe page has been set up to help the company raise the money if insurance won't cover the protest damage. Ashraf said any money raised beyond paying for the car and medical expenses for his employee will go to charity.

Read more at Red Alert Politics.