The phrase “Get ’em out” has replaced “You’re fired” in Mr. Trump’s vernacular, offering him an air of iron-fisted authority to buttress the image of toughness he projects.

But the handling of protesters at Mr. Trump’s events has raised questions about the methods and makeup of his security apparatus and the rights of peaceful critics to speak without being silenced. Despite accusations of suppression by some protesters, legal experts say that campaigns have the discretion to remove people from private events as they see fit, as long as they are not doing so based on race.

Video

Mr. Trump’s in-house security is led by Keith Schiller, a retired detective from the New York Police Department, who is omnipresent at his boss’s side. Mr. Schiller, who in September punched a Latino protester in the face outside Trump Tower in New York, is fiercely devoted to Mr. Trump, and was the first person to leap onto the dais in Dayton when the activist came running. Mr. Trump employs several other security guards, some of whom, in recent weeks, have been seen moving in plain clothes into crowds to try to end disruptions.

While their boss’s language tends to be caustic, the security guards have seemed to try defusing tense situations instead of inflaming them. According to campaign finance filings, Mr. Trump has spent about $170,000 on “security services” throughout his campaign.

While Mr. Trump’s contractors handle some scuffles, in recent episodes in places like Fayetteville, N.C., it was local law enforcement that appeared to be involved in removing protesters.

Mickey Nelson, a retired assistant director of protective operations with the Secret Service, said that agents coordinate with the police and would be involved with removing someone only as a last resort.

“Secret Service only gets involved if an individual poses a security threat or interferes with law enforcement activity,” Mr. Nelson said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Seemingly frustrated with the frequent interruptions at his events, Mr. Trump has threatened legal action against protesters, or “disrupters” as he has called them. On Saturday evening in Kansas City, Mo., Mr. Trump repeatedly said he would start filing charges against protesters in the future to teach them a lesson. As the night wore on, and disruptions became more frequent, Mr. Trump looked down at a woman protesting and called to law enforcement, “Arrest her. Arrest her.”

While Mr. Trump complains that protesters are violating his First Amendment rights, many of his critics wonder about their own ability to speak out. At a Trump campaign event held at Valdosta State University in Georgia last month, several black students complained to the police that they did not understand why they were kicked out.

Lee Rowland, an attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union, said that because campaign events are considered “political theater,” candidates who rent event spaces have the right to disinvite anyone they choose. Those who resist could be charged with trespassing.

“The reason the ejection of protesters sits so ill with people is because protesters are being ejected from rallies where the individual holding the rallies is seeking the highest office in the land,” Ms. Rowland said. “The first act of that office is swearing an oath to the Constitution, including the First Amendment.”