- Anti-Trump protesters rallied in the streets of Atlanta demanding the impeachment of the president.

App users: View full article here

About 50 activists held signs and chanted while marching from Piedmont Park to Centennial Olympic Park. The demonstration coincided with at least 30 marches in cities across the country.

The protesters insist President Donald Trump has been a blatant violator of the U.S. Constitution. Activist Ray Dafeico says the reasons for impeachment are clear.

Happening Now. Impeachment March at Piedmont Park coincides with Anti-Trump marches nationwide. #fox5atl pic.twitter.com/jx3lgjlPd3 — Aungelique Proctor (@aungeliquefox5) July 2, 2017

"The Amelimus clause, collusion with the Russians which is being figured out in a private investigation and obstruction of justice," the musician said.

The activists said their small turnout numbers do not represent the growing anti-Trump movement that they claim even includes Republicans now.

"He continues to denigrate women and minorities and the senior people of our land and the poorer people," protestor Debra Redwine Field complained.

Related VideoView Larger

The activists conceded an impeachment will be difficult with a Republican Congress, but they say they are in it for the long haul.

"I don't think it is going to be easy. It is going to take us coming out over and over again. There are marches in 30 cities with groups of different sizes, but we are all the same movement, Alana Stump said.

In a post on their Facebook page, the group states:

“Donald Trump has been in blatant violation of the Constitution from the day he was sworn into the office of President. The Constitution gives the House of Representatives the sole power to impeach an official, and it makes the Senate the sole court for impeachment trials. It is time that congressional representatives do their job and start the process to impeach this president. We believe president Trump has committed constitutional breaches, consistently lied, cheated, and enforces laws that primarily benefit him and his billionaire friends at the expense of the country.”

SEE ALSO: Griffin not 'laying down' for Trump, fears career is over