Something remarkable in science communication happened this week - dozens of anonymous Twitter accounts popped up claiming to be “rogue” US Government employees risking their jobs and possible prison time to take to Twitter to fight back against government censorship. Many of the accounts offered a specific focus on publicizing climate change science, claiming to be speaking on behalf of silenced government employees. The accounts became instant viral sensations, heralded by the press and activists as heroes risking everything to stand up to oppression. The “alternative” National Park Service account quickly racked up more than 1.3 million followers and citizens of the world rejoiced that scientists and park rangers had joined forces in defiance of censorship and that climate change could no longer be silenced.

Yet, strangely, precious few stopped to ask how we knew that the people behind these accounts were really the US Government employees they claimed to be. In a world in which “fake news” has become the buzzword du jour, it was particularly astonishing to see media article after media article largely accepting at face value the accounts’ claims that they were all government employees risking everything to ensure the truth was not silenced, while the activist community hailed them as hero government servants. When outlets like Slate began to ask for verification, the reaction from the Twitter community was swift and unilaterally negative.

To put this another way – in the space of a week a flurry of anonymous unverified Twitter accounts were rapidly registered using the names and logos of US Government agencies, each claiming to be run by US Government employees going “rogue” and the news media, activist community and society at large all happily hopped on the bandwagon, suspended all disbelief and excitedly proclaimed that the government rebellion had begun. Setting aside the obvious jokes about “if it's on the internet it must be true,” one can’t help but ask why so many people simply blindly accepted that if the accounts said they were run by rogue employees, it must be true. Whether these accounts truly are or were run by US Government employees going “rogue” or not, it is almost beyond belief that all it took was creating a quick anonymous Twitter account, tweeting that it was being run by government employees going rogue and within short order being lavished with 1.3 million followers and global press coverage. Spamming companies creating Twitter botnets must be kicking themselves for not thinking of this one.

In short, if the authors had simply set up a traditional website like “roguenasa.com” or conducted a mass email campaign, it is unlikely their message would have gone very far. A mass unsolicited chain email claiming to be a rogue government employee risking life and limb to get the word out about climate change and asking your help to forward his email on to your closest 50 friends would likely have been deleted faster than the one from the Nigerian prince risking his future throne to transfer you $50 million.

Indeed, the blind trust in such anonymous accounts was particularly striking coming just two months after issues with a similar anonymous source claiming to be a set of propaganda experts. In that case many other journalists had actually passed on the story, refusing to report on an anonymous source they knew nothing about. There the source had contacted journalists directly, in at least some cases via good old fashioned email. Here, by creating Twitter accounts and simply tweeting that they were government employees, these accounts, while shielded by the same anonymity, seem to have bypassed all of that skepticism and truth-hunting, finding a powerful loophole in the fact checking world.

Moreover, while each of the accounts claimed early on to be run by US Government employees gone “rogue,” many of them have now posted statements to say they have transferred control to non-Government employees for their protection, with @RogueNASA raising the specter of Hatch Act violations.

To recap, a series of anonymous Twitter accounts are created claiming to be run by government employees, they amass millions of followers almost overnight, then abruptly announce they are handing themselves off to non-government activists to take over from here.

We have no idea whether the accounts were ever created or operated by government employees and, if so, whether they still are run by those employees, with the statements of transfer perhaps being misdirection to avoid further government scrutiny. Yet, the fact that the accounts have resisted every request for even the most basic of verification that they were ever run by a government employee is concerning, especially given the timing of the handoffs once they had amassed substantial follower counts.

MotherBoard communicated earlier today via DM with one of the rogue accounts, @AltNatParkSer. The current owners of the account state that the account was previously created by an Englishman in May 2015 for unrelated purposes and then claims that a set of Park Service employees were given access earlier this week to post while they were on duty. They say the account has now been transferred to a distributed team of individuals, but steadfastly refuse to provide any evidence that any of the account’s tweets were ever authored by NPS employees.

Perhaps most importantly, the current controllers of the account state the original rangers are “not involved with anything now” and that “we've made it clear that we do not speak on behalf of the rangers anymore.”

In fact, after amassing more than 1.3 million followers, this afternoon the account actually renamed itself @NotAltWorld and wiped clean its original @AltNatParkSer account of all tweets, but keeping it incredibly valuable follower network. Its biography has also changed to shift its focus away from the lens of climate change and the park service to now read “The #Resistance team against #AltFacts #FauxNews #FauxScience Formerly: Unofficial National Park Service #Science #Climate #Facts Run by non-gov individuals.”

One of the reasons the @AltNatParkSer and sister accounts rose to prominence was their focus on publicizing climate change science in the face of alleged government gag orders. In this way the accounts became overnight celebrities in the climate activism world, wielding their enormous follower bases to promote climate change science to a vast audience.

Yet, rather than focusing exclusively on climate change, the accounts also rapidly began mixing in a healthy dose of tweets unrelated to climate change, transitioning from a pure-play science and facts-oriented outlet to a political activist outlet that mixed political discussion and coverage of hot button issues unrelated to climate science. Personal attacks on the new administration and even sexual innuendo made their way into the accounts’ Twitter streams.

In doing so, the accounts further politicized the discourse around climate change - rather than lifting it above the political fray, they had precisely the opposite effect, dragging it further into the mud. In short, by combining discussion of climate change with political and personal attacks on the administration, the accounts have made it that much easier for opponents of climate change to argue that even supporters of climate change discuss it in the context of politics rather than as a non-partisan scientific topic.

Perhaps most troubling, however, is that the accounts have in essence spawned a world of anonymous scientific communication in which science is publicized and communicated through anonymous accounts controlled by unknown individuals with unknown motivations and biases and who freely mix it with unrelated partisan conversation.

This raises the question of why these anonymous Twitter accounts were created in the first place. If their mission was to ensure trustworthy and reliable communication of climate change science to the public, why create a secretive anonymous Twitter account? Why not instead partner with major scientific organizations like the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and National Academy of Sciences (NAS)? In fact, why did these organizations not immediately step into the climate change communications void at the first sign of trouble earlier this week and leverage the trust and prestige of their brands to create official non-partisan Twitter accounts under their names and operated by the top scientists in the field?

Having verified Twitter accounts like @NASClimateChange or @AAASClimateChange that clearly list their contributors and limit their postings to science-only discussions would have been a powerful way to ensure the public has information it can trust in a non-partisan environment. I reached out to both organizations this afternoon for comment on the situation and specifically why they had not stepped up to provide authoritative social media voices on climate research during the EPA and USDA social media blackouts and whether they had any plans to do so in the future to provide a verified and known alternative to the “rogue” Twitter accounts.

A National Academy of Sciences spokeswoman responded they would explore whether the Academy’s leadership wished to comment, but after multiple inquiries they chose not to provide a response. AAAS’ Interim Chief Communications Officer responded by email only that “We do not have a comment” and pointed to AAAS’ statement of concern about the EPA/USDA blackouts.

It is remarkable that two of the nation’s premier and most respected scientific bodies would refuse to offer any comment on the rise of anonymous scientific communication, especially given that AAAS has an entire program devoted to the topic of "communicating science" and that they would refuse to offer any insight into whether they were considering offering authoritative alternative channels for public communication of climate change in the wake of potential US Government blackouts on the topic. After all, if @NASClimateChange or @AAASClimateChange had been launched earlier this week at the first signs of trouble, there would have been no reason for the dozens of “rogue” accounts to launch in the name of communicating climate change. While myriad individual researchers and organizations have been very active on Twitter discussing climate change, they lack the weight that a centralized marquee account could offer. It was only in the absence of such a centralized authoritative branded voice that these “rogue” accounts justified springing into existence.

Ironically, the rebranded @AltNatParkSer account’s 1.3 million followers dwarfs AAAS’ own meager 64,000 followers, the National Academies’ 40,000 followers and the National Academy of Sciences’ 9,000 followers. (Neither National Academies account uses the blue checkmark “verified” status either). It would appear the scientific world lost a tremendous opportunity, as one has to wonder whether, if AAAS or NAS had stepped forward, they could have gained those 1.3 million followers and reached a whole new community of users with scientific knowledge into the future.

Putting this all together, the evolution of the climate change and national-park focused @AltNatParkSer into the wide-ranging anything-goes @NotAltWorld after it had assembled 1.3 million followers based on the goodwill of the park service from which it has now disassociated itself, offers a poignant look at the future of activism and science communication in the social media era. The ability of these anonymous accounts to receive global media coverage and assemble a combined total of millions followers by simply popping into existence and claiming, without a shred of evidence, to be an employee gone rogue offers a chilling look at the loopholes in our fact checking apparatus and the willingness of the Internet public to suspend disbelief and blindly trust what they read on the Internet, so long as it’s on Twitter. It also shows that when established marque organizations fail to step into an information void, anonymous accounts will quickly do so.

Perhaps most frightening, however, is the glimpse we’ve gotten of a new paradigm rising in the social media era, of trusted authoritative scientific sources giving way to science being communicated through total anonymity – faceless Twitter accounts run by nameless individuals reaching millions of people. Welcome to the brave new world of science communication.