There’s no question about it, technology is playing a bigger and bigger role in all aspects of our lives, especially when it comes to the way we consume news. Social media — and especially Twitter — was an important weapon for Donald Trump as he ascended to the ultimate position in the country. On the flip side, the same weapon that he wields to disseminate his own versions of the truth, to attack anyone who’d criticize him and to rant about whatever comes to mind, can also be used against him.

Don't Miss: From Apple to Tesla, Silicon Valley’s biggest tech companies thrash Trump’s new immigration policy

Over the last few days, various anti-Trump rogue organizations have formed, and they’re all tweeting to get the word out. The most prominent such account is called Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff), and it’s run by unknown, unhappy individuals who are supposedly working for the Trump administration.

There’s no way to verify the authenticity of the newly minted Twitter channel, but the rogues have already posted many tweets detailing inside information from the White House.

The Twitter account went viral in a matter of days — it was created on January 26th and it reached more than 298,000 followers since then. Here are some of the messages posted by the rogue staffers. As you can see, the rogues have been quite prolific on Trump’s first week in office:

First tweet

Pres. Trump is already making waves at the office. Wants to be "the President who will be remembered as a King." His words, not ours. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 26, 2017

On who the (un)holy trinity is

VP Pence, Speaker Ryan, COS Priebus = unholy trinity. https://t.co/CEWKzuOTUi — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 27, 2017

On Trump

Pres. Trump doesn't quite understand the difference between being POTUS and being a business owner. Keeps asking "who says I can't?" — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 26, 2017

POTUS loved Kellyanne's alternative facts line. Said she was dumb for it, but loved the idea anyway because people would talk about it. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 26, 2017

The White House is "a little drab for what I'm used to" according to POTUS. Been going out of his way to inform folks. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 26, 2017

POTUS: Use external email accts for information control. Maintain an official acct with "filler" to "make it look good." — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 26, 2017

POTUS sowing real discord by being more interested in NYT than the work of being POTUS. Bannon encouraging him to irritate #UnholyTrinity . — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 29, 2017

POTUS fully overwhelmed after full week on the job. Things spilling over into out of office lives for everyone. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 29, 2017

POTUS fuming after judge order last night. Suggested having agents to "do it anyway" & ignore order. Preibus said to be at wits end. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 29, 2017

For more news videos visit Yahoo View, available now on iOS and Android.

On conflict of interest

POTUS son-in-law tapped as advisor. Appears Kushner's assignment is to advise POTUS how govt can aid Trump Organization's profit margins. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 27, 2017

On Russia

VP Pence to sit in on POTUS/Putin phone call tomorrow. POTUS doesn't like idea, but gave in to pressure from #UnholyTrinity . — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 28, 2017

#UnholyTrinity insistence to monitor Putin call was due to concern POTUS hasn't told full story about Putin attempts at blackmail. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 28, 2017

After call, #UnholyTrinity do not seem to have had any fears allayed. POTUS behavior during call said to be suspicious. #POTUSindistress — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 28, 2017

#UnholyTrinity urging POTUS that if Putin is compromising him to allow them to help. POTUS continues to deny, despite firm intelligence. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 28, 2017

Bannon says to take POTUS at his word. Probably has more to do w/ his attempts to control WH over Priebus. Not believed to know anything. — Rogue POTUS Staff (@RoguePOTUSStaff) January 28, 2017

Story Continues