WASHINGTON - Even though she knows it's a longshot, Lynn Gavigan of Strongsville thinks it's worth trying to impeach President Donald Trump.

Gavigan says she'll be among several hundred people who will gather at 12:30 p.m. Sunday for a demonstration by the Free Stamp statue in Cleveland's Willard Park to demand that the nation free itself from Trump.

The Cleveland event organized by IndivisibleCLE is among several dozen pro-impeachment rallies to be held in Washington and around the country that day. Other local activist groups will participate, as well.

"This will broadcast that there are grounds for impeachment and the Republicans in Congress who are protecting him need to go in 2018," Gavigan said.

The marchers say Trump should be impeached for multiple reasons including interfering with an FBI investigation of Russian election tampering, violating the U.S. Constitution's "emoluments clause" by refusing the place his foreign business assets into a blind trust, and issuing a travel ban that they believe violates several Constitutional provisions.

"While we vehemently oppose the dangerous, discriminatory and detrimental polices put forth by the Trump administration, this march is about impeaching a president who has a disdain for the fundamental document of our country -- the Constitution," organizer Suzy Scullin of Lakewood said an email. "A leader who doesn't respect the law puts all Americans -- both Republicans and Democrats -- in danger and degrades our core principles and values, those that have made America great already. If Congress does not act on these transgressions now, it paves the way for future leaders to also skirt the law and not be held accountable by the Constitution, our branches of government and the people they are called to serve."

The House of Representatives has voted to impeach only two presidents -- Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton -- neither of whom were removed from office by the U.S. Senate. The Republican drive to impeach Clinton generated enough backlash that Democrats subsequently gained seats in the House of Representatives.

While several Democrats in Congress have called for Trump's impeachment, it's unlikely to happen while Republicans control both the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate.

Impeach Trump, Improve Obamacare #RepealandReplaceTrump -Rep. Al Green -- Congressman Al Green (@RepAlGreen) June 28, 2017

And even when Democrats were in charge, they refused to advance former Cleveland-area Democratic congressman Dennis Kucinich's efforts to impeach former President George Bush and former Vice President Dick Cheney for embroiling the nation in the the Iraq war.

Now a commentator on FoxNews, Kucinich pooh-poohs the current calls to impeach Trump. He says the procedure would be premature, and impeachment should only be a last resort.

"It is destructive to America to proceed with an impeachment at this stage of the presidency," Kucinich told FoxNews. "This is not the first thing you reach for, because when the first big move a party makes is towards impeachment, it's very difficult for the American people to conclude that it is anything but a partisan issue."