Protesters made themselves heard in the nation's capital Friday, leaving a trail of damage along some city blocks, disrupting security checkpoints at President Donald Trump's inauguration, and clashing with police as Trump supporters tried to celebrate.

As people poured into the city to watch Trump sworn in as the 45th president, they encountered protesters across the area throughout the day. Many of the demonstrations were nonviolent, with people holding signs that spoke to their causes and concerns. One protest even took on a carnival atmosphere, with puppets, stilt walkers and a giant inflatable elephant wearing a sign that read "racism." But other groups tried to disrupt the day's events by burning flags, throwing bricks and rioting en masse, leading to injuries and 217 arrests by Friday evening.

Six people intent on interrupting the presidential swearing-in ceremony made it into the closest section of seats to Trump. They wore shirts that spelled out "R-E-S-I-S-T" and got up and started shouting "We the people!" as Trump took the oath of office at noon. As authorities removed them from the area, they raised their fists and shouted "USA! USA!" One woman yelled, "We're for an America for all of us."

Some in the crowd responded with taunts: "Na, na, na, na, hey, hey, hey, good bye."

After the swearing in, protesters arrived at the Franklin Square area and clashed with police. The protesters were throwing rocks, bricks and chunks of concrete and taking newspaper boxes and barriers and putting them on the streets. Meanwhile police appeared to be using a flurry of flash-bang grenades and chemical spray to hold the protesters back, pushing them block-by-block west along K Street, from 12th Street toward 14th Street.

Protesters pitching diverse causes but united against Donald Trump demonstrated on Inauguration Day in Washington D.C.

During the afternoon clash, the protesters started a fire in the middle of the street using garbage bins and newspaper boxes, and some climbed trees and light poles. About 100 officers in riot gear, carrying shields, stood in a line blocking off K Street.

"It's a little jarring when you're in a peaceful march with drumming and chanting and the next thing you know flash bangs are going off around you," said Daniel Hultquist, a protester from Rhode Island. "People that throw rocks and bricks are undermining the cause."

When one police SUV tried to drive through the crowd, several protesters dressed in all black tried to block it; when the SUV sped up, pushing the protesters aside, one picked up a rock, threw it, and smashed the vehicle's rear window. At about 4:15 p.m., as the inaugural parade took place blocks away, protesters set a car on fire along K Street, sending plumes of dark smoke through downtown.

Trump supporters and protesters clashed throughout the day at several locations, and it sometimes turned violent. Three officers were injured during an earlier protest along the K Street corridor, including an officer who was struck by an object that had been thrown, said Doug Buchanan, a spokesman for the D.C. Fire and Emergency Medical Services. A fourth officer was struck by a thrown object on K Street in the late afternoon and was taken to a hospital.

During the morning protest, a large group of black-clad protesters - self-described as anti-capitalist and antifascist - made their way south on 13th Street near K Street, throwing newspaper boxes and garbage cans into the street and trying to set them on fire, leaving them smoldering. They also threw fireworks and broke glass at bus stops, businesses and on the windows of a limousine.

Police cleaned up behind them as they marched, and authorities used chemical spray in an attempt to disrupt the vandalism. They ultimately herded the group away from the inauguration parade route with a large number of police vehicles and officers in riot gear, and they used concussion grenades - which make a loud noise - to break up the crowd.

D.C. Interim Police Chief Peter Newsham said officers arrested 217 people in connection with protests that turned violent and caused "significant damage to a number of blocks in our city." He said the department is investigating whether officers handling the protests deployed either flash-bang or percussion grenades - used to disorient people in crowds - and he said that protesters had their own. Numerous Washington Post reporters saw officers use such grenades.

Newsham said a "a very small percentage" of the thousands who came to demonstrate the inauguration resorted to violence. Police said those arrested were charged with rioting.

"It's disappointing that it had to happen," Newsham said, praising how officers responded. "We knew this was going to be a long day . . . Anyone who thinks they can come here and break the law, we will take them into custody."

At least one bystander, a middle-aged man, was injured when the grenades went off; he was hit in the head, which was cut and bleeding.

Another man, Robert Hrifko, 62, who rode his Harley Davidson motorcycle up from St. Augustine, Florida, to join the Bikers for Trump group, approached several firemen and asked: "Do you think I need stitches?"

A welt on his cheekbone dribbled blood. He said a man hit him with rock after he tackled a protester who was attempting to throw an aluminum chair at a police officer.

"Bam - just waylaid me," he said. The firemen offered him a Band-Aid and said he would be all right. "Good, I ain't got insurance anymore, because I can't afford Obamacare."

Mayor Muriel Bowser tweeted that she respects the rights of protesters but "will not condone crime and vandalism which are the antithesis of what we hope to accomplish today." She also wrote: "To those of you visiting Washington, D.C. we welcome you but we cannot allow you to destroy our neighborhoods."

Protesters jammed city streets and also aimed to jam checkpoints to the inauguration, at times successfully.

"Shut it down!" protesters shouted at the checkpoint at John Marshall Park early Friday morning. There, five black men stood at the front of the crowd, chained together, blocking the path.

Hailing from different parts of the country, the men were protesting on behalf of the Black Lives Matter movement. As they stood together, they shouted that by demonstrating, "all we have to lose is our chains."

Police began redirecting people to other entrances at about 8:30 a.m. As protesters there shouted, "This is what democracy looks like," a Trump supporter countered. He pointed to the other side of the fence and said, "This is what democracy looks like, but I can't get to it because of you!"

Michael Henning came from Dalton, Ohio, to see the events on the Mall and expressed frustration with how police handled the situation.