What is the #MarchForTruth?

Every day we learn more about the role Russian state-led hacking and information warfare played in the 2016 election, and there are crucial unanswered questions about the relationship between the Russian state and Donald Trump, his associates and his campaign. The legitimacy of the United States government hinges on the answers to these questions. If the President was elected even in part due to collusion with a foreign effort to interfere in our democratic process, then the will of the people has been subverted. #MarchForTruth seeks to ensure the investigations continue unobstructed, and to demand the answers that the American people deserve to restore faith in our democracy.

We need to be ready in case the President attempts to shut down Robert Mueller's investigation.

Today experts are increasingly concerned that President Donald Trump wants to remove Special Counsel Robert Mueller or severely limit his investigation. #MarchForTruth is coordinating efforts to prepare a response in the event that this assault on the rule of law does indeed take place. Learn more about Rapid Response plans.

A special counsel is not enough.

We still need an independent commission with subpoena powers. The appointment of Robert Mueller by the Department of Justice to serve as Special Counsel on the Russia investigation came after a cascade of damaging developments for the President and the firing of FBI Director James Comey. But as House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi put it, "A special prosecutor is the first step, but it cannot be the last. Director Mueller will still be in the chain of command under the Trump-appointed leadership of the Justice Department. He cannot take the place of a truly independent, outside commission that is completely free from the Trump administration's meddling."

In recent days, bombshell reports in the New York Times and Washington Post have raised the prospect very seriously. And, the resistance is working to prepare. If Donald Trump fires Robert Mueller, we need to be ready to protest this blatant assault on the rule of law and demand that Congress step up its oversight.

And Congressional investigations must continue. The appointment of a special counsel does not relieve Congress of its responsibility to conduct oversight of the Trump Administration. House and Senate investigations must continue with bipartisan cooperation to find the truth.

The gravity of this situation is profound. The sovereignty of our nation was attacked to elect a man who is a threat to the rule of law. There are criminal investigations, and investigations into matters of national security, that must be completed to restore our faith.



The culture of deceit that surrounds Donald Trump and his associates must be dealt with urgently. If this man was elected in part by colluding with a foreign power, then we must know it. We must know if our government is legitimate. For if it is not, then we must right that wrong. We must restore trust, in our government, and in one another.

For more information on the urgency of this issue and why obstruction of justice merits impeachment, visit Indivisible Guide.

#MarchForTruth calls on citizens to raise their voices and let our elected leaders know that Americans want answers.

The legitimacy of our democracy is more important than the interests of any party, or any President. So, we rise together to call for a complete, fair and impartial investigation, for the pursuit of truth, and for the restoration of faith in our electoral system and the Office of the Presidency.

Our goals are simple:

The special counsel's investigation must continue unimpeded;

An independent commission must be established and Congressional investigations should be properly resourced and pursued free of partisan interests;

As much information should be made available to the public as possible, and as soon as possible;

Congress should require Donald Trump to release his tax returns to clarify his business interests and obligations to any foreign entity;

If crimes were committed or if collusion is discovered, it must be prosecuted.

Join us!

Email marchfortruth@gmail.com for more information.