IN HIS cool-your-jets remarks the day after the presidential election, Barack Obama noted that “a lot of our fellow Americans are exultant today” and “a lot of Americans are less so”. Whatever Americans’ feelings about the results, he said, “we are actually on one team” and the election was just an “intramural scrimmage”. The 44th president is known for his preternatural calm and the perhaps excessive charity he shows to political opponents. But Mr Obama’s cool assessment of the mood of the nation is hard to reconcile with the unprecedented ferocity and range of protests breaking out against the president-elect in cities across America.

In Boston, Chicago and Washington, DC; in Portland, Oregon, and Austin, Texas; and in Donald Trump’s home, New York City, large numbers of protesters are taking to the streets to condemn Mr Trump as president. The Republican victor is “not our president”, according to the chanting among many of the 20,000 or so demonstrators who gathered outside his eponymous tower in New York City on November 9th, where more protests are scheduled for November 10th and the weekend. Many were simply shocked and appalled by the electoral outcome—though there were no Hillary Clinton signs in view. Others had particular concerns. Simone Mills, a first-generation American whose parents came to New York from St Kitts, is fearful of how Mr Trump’s presidency will affect her family. “He’s just too racist for this county” she remarked. Many seemed to agree. A chant of: “Racist. Sexist. Anti-gay. Donald Trump go away!” was shouted by the crowd in New York throughout the evening.

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.













Other chants on the pavements in New York ranged from taunts (“Fuck Trump”) to quibbles with his positions (“Fuck your wall”) to references to his on-camera boasts about sexual assault (“Pussy grabs back”, “End rape culture”). But some of the critiques are more radical—and focused. One of the groups that put together the protest was Socialist Alternative, an organisation that helped push for Seattle’s $15 minimum wage. More than a few anarchists were found on the streets, with signs like “Dump the Elephant, Dump the Ass, Let’s Build a Party of the Working Class”.

For one 17-year-old attendee, the anarchism was slightly alienating. “I felt very empowered”, she said of the march that stopped rush-hour traffic on Fifth Avenue, “but there were moments when I felt very dissociated” from the messages on the signs, including one that read “No one for president!” Another teenage protester agreed with this sentiment, surprised to encounter the idea that, she said, both “the Republican and Democratic parties should be abandoned”. A young Hispanic woman noted the contrast between the anti-Trump march and Black Lives Matter protests she attended two years ago. In 2014, symbolic targets of the protesters’ wrath—police officers—lined the streets; now, “the perceived enemy is so difficult to identify.” There is “less rage”, she said, and more of a “love in the form of a passionate anger”.

A day after the march, a 17-year-old was gratified to see that the event was broadcast on national television, and that similar protests were filling streets across the country. The efforts will not prevent Donald Trump from taking office on January 20th, she knew, but they “have to be sparking some kind of reaction”. “It’s reassuring”, she said, that when the president-elect takes office and makes a “bad call”, it won’t go unnoticed, and that discontent with Mr Trump will be channelled into “concerted efforts” to advance the causes he disdains. “It gives me hope”, she said.