Photo

For the third day in a row since Donald J. Trump was elected president, thousands of people took part in protests that bloomed across the country, venting their frustration at the election results.

In Miami, protesters shook signs and chanted during a demonstration on Friday evening, blocking the causeway that connects the city’s downtown and South Beach. In Madison, Wis., they interrupted commuters near the University of Wisconsin. Near Iowa City, they blocked traffic on a section of Interstate 80.

In Portland, Ore., the police reported a shooting around 1 a.m. Saturday at a bridge that had been blocked by demonstrators. Witnesses said a protester had been shot in the leg after an altercation with a car full of people, who they said were angry about traffic being stalled. The police released a description of a suspect, who they said had fled.

Demonstrators also marched in Atlanta, rushing over a bridge to block a highway. Later in the evening, a flag was set alight in front of the Georgia Capitol, as protesters referenced Mr. Trump’s campaign slogan, chanting “America was never great,” while accompanied by a steady drumbeat.

Photo

They protested in Tempe, Ariz., and Orlando, Fla., in Raleigh, N.C., and Olympia, Wash. Shouts of “Not my president” and chants declaring “We don’t accept the president-elect” rang out over Sixth Avenue in Manhattan as a crowd began to march uptown toward Trump Tower, the home of the president-elect. Late Friday night, the New York Police Department said that 11 people had been arrested for disorderly conduct.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Earlier in Washington Square Park, which is surrounded by the buildings of New York University, a crowd alternated between chants of protest and words of encouragement for one another. Near a bench off the center of the park, an eerie plastic mannequin that was missing its head had been abandoned. Pinned to its chest was a Post-it note, on which was written “NOT MY PRESIDENT,” with a heart in the bottom right corner.