Paris’ Hôtel de Ville (city hall) is illuminated in green following the announcement by President Trump that the U.S. will withdraw from the 2015 Paris accord and try to negotiate a new global deal on climate change. (Photo: Nadine Achoui-Lesage/AP)

Cities across the world protested President Trump’s announcement that the U.S. will withdraw from the Paris Agreement, illuminating buildings in green in solidarity with the 194 nations that remain committed to the climate change accord. (Trump Tower, on New York’s Fifth Avenue, was its usual color.)

New York

City Hall

City Hall shines green tonight because New York City will honor the goals of the #ParisAgreement. pic.twitter.com/BV0IIZYPpA — Bill de Blasio (@NYCMayor) June 2, 2017





One World Trade Center

#OneWTC will be lit green tonight in solidarity with the #ParisAgreement @OneWTC — One World Trade (@OneWTC) June 1, 2017









Washington, D.C.

Wilson Building

Exiting the #ParisAgreement may make us see red & feel blue, but the Wilson Building's lit up green tonight to prove the fight endures pic.twitter.com/gRUMDtbXlq — Council of DC (@councilofdc) June 2, 2017





Boston

City Hall

City Hall is green tonight. Boston stands with the environment. We must protect our future. #ParisAccord pic.twitter.com/yTL5albn2f — Mayor Marty Walsh (@marty_walsh) June 2, 2017





In addition to lighting buildings green, several American cities, including New York and Chicago, have pledged to uphold the Paris Agreement on their own. When the U.S. officially leaves the Paris Agreement in 2020, it will join Syria and Nicaragua as the only nations that are not part of the deal.

Several other cities around the world also lit buildings and monuments in green to show their support of the agreement.

Montreal

Ville de Montréal (Montreal City Hall)





Paris

Hôtel de Ville





Mexico City

Monumento a la Revolución





Angel of Independence

Green lights are projected at the Angel of Independence monument in Mexico City. (Photo: Carlos Jasso/Reuters) More

Meanwhile, Clover Moore, the lord mayor of Sydney, announced that the city’s Town Hall will be illuminated green on Friday night.

Slideshow: World reaction to Trump’s decision to exit the Paris climate accord >>>

Read more from Yahoo News: