Protesters across the US are gearing up for weekend demonstrations over the election of Donald Trump, as other activists begin work on plans to disrupt the Republican’s inauguration in Washington early next year.

White House taken into uncharted territory by Trump's conflicts of interest Read more

Rowdy protests against Trump and his divisive campaign have spread to cities all over the country following his victory on Tuesday, leading to dozens of arrests and a complaint from Trump in one of his first public remarks as president-elect.

On Friday night in Portland, Orgeon, an unidentified man was wounded at 12.45am local time, as he and dozens of other protesters crossed Morrison Bridge during one of a number of demonstrations. Police said in a statement a man got out of a vehicle on the bridge, confronted and then shot the protester, who was taken to hospital with non-life threatening injuries. The suspect was still at large, police said.

Earlier in the night, for the second night in a row, Portland protesters blocked traffic and threw objects at police dressed in riot gear who responded with pepper spray and flash-bang devices. At one point, police pushed protesters back and appeared to take at least one person into custody, according to footage on a local NBC affiliate.

Hundreds marched in the streets of Los Angeles, blocking traffic as they waved signs and chanted “We reject the president elect” and “Whose streets? Our streets”.

Several thousand activists marched through downtown Miami, with a few hundred making their way onto a highway, halting traffic in both directions.

In New York, demonstrators again gathered in Washington Square Park and by Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue. More than 10,000 people signed up to attend a noon march on Saturday from Union Square to Trump Tower, the future president’s home and corporate headquarters. Several other actions are planned for other cities.

“Join us in the streets! Stop Trump and his bigoted agenda,” the organizers of the New York event said in a Facebook post.



Trump complained in a tweet late on Thursday that “professional protesters, incited by the media” were tarnishing his electoral success, which he said was “very unfair”. Amid intense criticism, Trump said hours later in a second post that he appreciated the “passion for our great country” shown by demonstrators.

Activists expressed determination to build momentum for major activity on 20 January, when Trump will officially enter the White House.

A “million women” march on the capital is being planned for the day of Trump’s inauguration, amid intense anger that the next US president allegedly sexually assaulted multiple women and boasted of doing so in a leaked recording.

A timeline of Donald Trump's alleged sexual misconduct: who, when and what Read more

Leftwing and anarchist groups were also making plans for protests in Washington on inauguration day, according to flyers circulating online, raising the prospect of chaotic scenes as Trump takes the oath of office.

Other activists were biding their time before mounting a response to Trump’s election. Patrisse Cullors, one of the founders of Black Lives Matter, said their movement was “grieving and mourning” following the result.

“We are bringing folks together to imagine what kinds of organizing we will need to do under a Trump presidency,” said Cullors. “I do think we can organize as we have been, and build something bigger and stronger than the hate Trump and his team have exhibited towards marginalized communities.”



From Thursday night into Friday, thousands of people took to the streets in Denver, Minneapolis, Milwaukee, Portland, Oakland and several other US cities, as well as Vancouver, Canada. The protests were mostly peaceful and orderly, though there were scattered acts of civil disobedience and damage to property.

The rowdiest scenes were in Portland, where about 4,000 people marched into the city centre late on Thursday. At least 29 people were arrested after protesters threw objects at officers, smashed shop windows and damaged a car dealership, the Portland police department said, declaring the demonstration a riot. Officers used pepper spray and rubber projectiles to disperse the crowd, the department added.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Protesters in Portland, Oregon, on the night of Thursday 10 November. Photograph: STRINGER/Reuters

In Minneapolis, dozens of people marched on to Interstate 94, blocking traffic in both directions for at least an hour as police stood by. A smaller band of demonstrators briefly halted traffic on a busy Los Angeles highway before police cleared them off.



Baltimore police reported that about 600 people marched through the Inner Harbor area, with some blocking roadways by sitting in the street. Two people were arrested, police said. One of the largest demonstrations was in Denver, where a crowd estimated to number about 3,000 gathered on the grounds of the Colorado state capitol and marched through the city centre.

Earlier in the day, high school students staged walkouts across the country, including in Los Angeles and San Francisco

Elsewhere on Thursday, hundreds protested in Salt Lake City, Utah; San Francisco; Houston, Texas; and in Washington DC, where about 100 protesters marched from the White House to Donald Trump’s newly opened hotel several blocks away.

At least 200 people rallied there after dark, many of them chanting “No hate! No fear! Immigrants are welcome here!” and carrying signs with such slogans as “Impeach Trump” and “Not my president”.



“I can’t support someone who supports so much bigotry and hatred. It’s heart-breaking,” said 25-year-old Joe Daniels from Virginia.

While protesters marched against Trump, at least one group was preparing to take to the streets in celebration. The Loyal White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan said on their website they would be holding a “victory parade” in North Carolina next month. Men in KKK-style white hoods were seen walking in the state on the morning after Trump was elected.

