Police use pepper spray Friday on protesters in Washington, D.C. Photo: Mark Tenally/Associated Press

WASHINGTON—Police arrested more than 200 people in sometimes violent protests here on President Donald Trump’s Inauguration Day, though authorities said most of the demonstrations across the nation’s capital were peaceful.

Protests also took place New York City, Boston, Seattle, Los Angeles and Portland, with activists also planning events for this weekend in other U.S. locales.

In Washington, Interim Metropolitan Police Chief Peter Newsham said there had been no life-threatening injuries during the protests. Six officers had minor injuries.

Some protesters vandalized stores along blocks of the city’s central business district The chief said the violent protesters represented “a very very small percentage” of the thousands of people “who came here to peacefully assemble’’ and protest. The violence, he said, were in parts of the city well-removed from the secure areas of the inauguration and the parade.

The protesters who moved through the central business district didn’t clearly indicate they were acting against Mr. Trump’s presidency; some held signs about fascism.

Windows at several businesses were smashed, including a Starbucks and McDonald’s . Several municipal bus shelters were destroyed, while trash cans and newspaper boxes were tipped over and set ablaze. One protester threw a traffic cone at a police officer on a motorcycle at close range.

Police said they used pepper spray and “other control devices” to subdue the protesters.

“During the incident, police vehicles were damaged and two uniformed officers sustained minor injuries from coordinated attacks by members of the group that were attempting to avoid arrest,” according to a police statement.

Demonstrators in Washington, D.C. sit down Friday in the street to prevent spectators from reaching one of the entrances to the inaugural parade route. Photo: astrid riecken/European Pressphoto Agency

At one point, officers used nonlethal weapons, including flash-bang devices and chemicals, to disperse a crowd at 12th Street Northwest and L Street Northwest.

Police fired dozens of rounds of stun grenades to disperse the crowd, and used chemicals to clear several intersections. A small number of demonstrators threw rocks at police.

Other protest groups remained largely peaceful, attempting to shut down several of the entrances to the National Mall where Mr. Trump was sworn in.

At one gated entrance, protesters opposed to the completion of the Dakota Access oil pipeline linked arms through short pieces of PVC pipe known as lockboxes, a technique that helps keep them from being pulled apart by police.

“We’re here in solidarity with Standing Rock,” said one demonstrator, who said her name was “Lightbulb.” She referred to the Indian reservation where some of the protests have taken place. “Trump isn’t going to make anything better,” she said.

After a warning, police dragged from the entrance a handful of protesters who hadn’t brought lockboxes, and officers brought out electric hand-grinders to cut through the pipes to separate them.

In New York, a crowd of several hundred people gathered at Foley Square to protest Mr. Trump’s inauguration. They chanted “Black Lives Matter” and “education, not deportation.”

Adrienne Craig-Williams, 36 years old, said climate change was the most important issue to her and expressed hope the protest would be constructive for New Yorkers who oppose Mr. Trump. “I hope that it brings people together and it’s an antidote to feeling despair,” said Ms. Craig-Williams.

Jane Orendain, 76, said she was protesting to increase awareness of the ramifications of repealing the Affordable Care Act. “Healthcare for everybody is the absolute most important thing,” Ms. Orendain said.

Thousands of protesters gathered in front of the Trump tower in Chicago, one of the city’s tallest and most distinctive buildings, holding signs decrying Mr. Trump as illegitimate and calling for his impeachment. A line of Chicago police officers, some on horseback and some on bikes, prevented the demonstrators from marching down Lake Shore Drive, the main Chicago thoroughfare that runs along Lake Michigan.

Among them was Robert Bowton, 65, who traveled from Pontiac, Ill., about two hours Southwest of Chicago, with signs that said, “If you are not terrified, you are not paying attention.” Mr. Bowton, who claimed he has never protested against a president before, said taking part the march was “healing” for him.

He was joined by his daughter-in-law, 38-year-old Kim Bowton, who hoped the protest in this city and others would show the president that his opponents “are not going to sit back.”

“We are going to keep fighting against the things he does and for what we believe in,” she said, including among them rights for those of all religious beliefs and immigrants.

In Boston, several hundred people gathered in the middle of Boston’s historic Common to protest the new administration, holding signs saying “Black Lives Matter” and “Protect Immigrant Rights.”

“What I am hoping for is the beginning of some serious organizing on behalf of working and poor people,” said Rose Brown, 71, handing out a newsletter for the Revolutionary Organization of Labor. “I think it’s a good thing that young people are getting out in the streets again.”

Within hours of the Washington arrests, a lawyer acting on behalf of some of the protesters sued the city for alleged violations of their rights, charging that police had rounded up groups of people without singling out alleged wrongdoers, and arresting innocent protesters in the process. The suit claimed police “indiscriminately and repeatedly deploy chemical irritants, attack the individuals with batons, and throw flash-bang grenades’’ at people who haven’t broken the law.

Mr. Newsham, the city’s interim police chief, denied officers used excessive force or failed to distinguish peaceful protesters from those who were committing crimes. “Our officers showed and continued to show excellent judgment,’’ he said. “Our purpose is to try to avoid arrests.’’

In Seattle on Friday night, crowds threw bricks at police and a man was shot during a chaotic protest near the University of Washington campus. Crowds gathered to protest Mr. Trump, as well as the appearance of an editor for the conservative website Brietbart.

“Officers working to remove one person with suspected gunshot wound to abdomen from crowd at UW campus demonstration,” the Seattle Police Department wrote on its Twitter feed.

The Seattle Fire Department said the man was taken to the hospital with a “possible life threatening injury.”

Earlier in the evening, hundreds marched peacefully through Seattle to protest Mr. Trump.

—Devlin Barrett, Shibani Mahtani and Jon Kamp contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com, Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com and Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com

Appeared in the January 21, 2017, print edition as 'More Than 200 Arrested.'