But most of the day’s events were peaceful. In Grand Rapids, Mich., more than 4,000 people — twice the number of people who sat out jobs and school days in Grand Rapids on February’s nationwide “Day Without Immigrants” — had turned out in the rain by midafternoon, closing large sections of the city’s Latino community. Bakeries, markets, restaurants and clothing stores had shuttered for the day out of solidarity or for lack of workers.

In Homestead, Fla., where immigrant farmworkers keep fields of zucchini, beans, cherry tomatoes and okra growing, over 1,000 people marched from a park to City Hall. Many were not sure how employers would react when they returned to work on Tuesday. Local activists had planned to accompany farmworkers back to their jobs to offer support.

Photo

About 300 people gathered outside a Home Depot near Minneapolis to protest what they said were the anti-labor practices of some janitorial companies that clean stores for Home Depot, Sears and other retailers.

“We have no benefits. No vacation. We don’t have anything,” said Antonia Sanchez, a Mexican immigrant who has worked for one such contractor for nine years, cleaning a Sears. “It doesn’t matter if we are black, white or brown. What matters is that we stay united and fight for what we deserve.”

In Austin, Tex., some immigrants’ rights advocates staged a sit-in at the office of Gov. Greg Abbott, a Republican, over legislation that would punish local officials and cities for refusing to help the federal government with deportations. Outside the Immigration and Customs Enforcement office in San Francisco, protesters blocked an intersection and a driveway.

In New York, protesters in Union Square and Washington Square Park waved signs with slogans in Spanish, like “Workers united will never be defeated.” There were more than 30 arrests, mostly for disorderly conduct.

Marchers moved to Foley Square in Lower Manhattan, where Mayor Bill de Blasio shouted to the crowd, just as a double-decker tour bus rolled up, “Everything Donald Trump wants to do, I have a simple message: No, you can’t! No se puede!”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Damian Rodriguez, the owner of First Class Car and Limo Service in Inwood, said his company had given its 400 drivers the option of staying home on Monday morning, and about 20 percent of them accepted.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We all have family members and acquaintances who are affected, who don’t have their papers and are afraid,” he said.

Still, for at least one limousine driver, taking the day off was simply unaffordable. As he bought coffee and a pastry at a Dominican bakery in Washington Heights, Fernando Garcia, 49, explained that because he was a partner in his company, they all had to contribute equally or the business would suffer.

Rent was due on May 1, he added. “I’m going to work today because without work, who’s going to pay the bills?” he said in Spanish, to a murmur of approval from a bakery worker behind the counter.

As May Day commemorations go, Monday’s turnout was extraordinary. But in a crowded calendar of anti-Trump dissent — after January’s Women’s March, late April’s March for Science and Saturday’s People’s Climate March — the scenes and chants took on the quality of a refrain.

In Los Angeles, tens of thousands of people holding signs declaring “No human is illegal” and “Sanctuary now!” marched about two miles from MacArthur Park to City Hall downtown.

The crowd swelled with members of unions representing janitors, health care workers and hotel employees, as well as members of the Writers Guild of America and other Hollywood unions.

Across the street from City Hall, dozens of police officers separated a few dozen Trump supporters from the protesters as they shouted bitterly at one another.

“I’m here for the Constitution and for America, for following the law,” said Dura Young, 60, a currency trader from Torrance, Calif. “It’s not immigrants, it’s the illegals — they’ve committed a crime by coming here. Of course they’re going to get deported.”

It was still Loyalty Day, and the members of the pro-Trump counterprotest began reciting the Pledge of Allegiance. The protesters joined in. When it had ended, they were still shouting the last words: “One nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. For all. For all.”