CLOSE Tens of thousands of people took to the streets in cities across the U.S. on Wednesday to protest against Donald Trump following his surprise defeat of Hillary Clinton in Tuesday’s presidential election. Time

Protesters Donald Trump's presidential election march around Campus Martius Park, Wednesday Nov. 9, 2016, in Detroit. (Photo: Steve Perez, AP)

Anti-Trump demonstrators in several big cities and on college campuses across the U.S. protested for a second day against the president-elect, suggesting Thursday that national unity won't come easy after the contentious election.

Donald Trump weighed in on the two days of protests Thursday evening, complaining that he took part in a "very open and successful presidential election" but now "professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting. Very unfair!"

Just had a very open and successful presidential election. Now professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting. Very unfair! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 11, 2016

In New York, for the second straight night, hundreds of protesters gathered near the iconic Trump Tower to express their anger and anguish over the election of the businessman.

The crowd was notably young. The organizers were not yet old enough to vote, but said that they wanted to inspire young people to voice their opinions and understand that they can shape the future.

"We've got to protest," said organizer Elijah Newman, 16, of Brooklyn, as he stood with hundreds of other Millennials in front of Trump Tower.

"It's not just Donald Trump -- it's the system of education," he said. "New York City is like a megaphone to the entire world. It's important that we're protesting here because it will inspire and influence other people to start protesting."

In Los Angeles, protests continued on Thursday — though not as big as Wednesday — as organizers claimed they were saving their energy for the weekend, The Los Angeles Times reported. Hundreds marched onto a busy highway causing a complete standstill late Wednesday night, prompting the Los Angeles Police Department to arrest several demonstrators.

Up in Portland, demonstrators protested for a third straight night as protests turned violent despite calls from police urging people to remain peaceful, The Oregonian reported. Citing "extensive criminal and dangerous behavior," authorities declared the demonstrations a protest riot later in the night and instructed people to move via loudspeaker as violent protests scenes circulated on social media.

Due to extensive criminal and dangerous behavior, protest is now considered a riot. Crowd has been advised. — Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) November 11, 2016

Crowd throwing projectiles at police. Significant damage to area car lot. — Portland Police (@PortlandPolice) November 11, 2016

Car windows getting smashed left and right. #Trumpriotpic.twitter.com/0JyM69bXUb — Mike Bivins (@itsmikebivins) November 11, 2016

Meanwhile, dozens of students from Texas State University rallied on their campus against Trump.

Holding signs that read “Make America Free Again” and “Tear Down the Fascist,” the students gathered on the Quad of the campus in San Marcos, Tex., about 30 miles south of Austin. Some chanted, “What do we need? Love! When do we want it? Now!” Others argued with Trump supporters who waded into the crowd. The gathering appeared to be generally peaceful.

The afternoon rally came a day after fliers appeared in bathrooms across campus warning of pro-Trump "vigilante squads." The fliers had a picture of men clad in camouflage holding rifles and said the squads would “arrest and torture those deviant university leaders spouting off all this diversity garbage.” University police were investigating the source of the fliers.

There have been other incidents.

In Chicago, a video went viral on social media that shows a 49-year-old man being badly beaten by a group of young men as bystanders yelled anti-Trump taunts at the victim. The incident, which occurred on Wednesday, began after the man got into a traffic accident with the assailants, who stole his car.

In DeWitt, Mich.,school officials on Thursday said they were investigating three reports that students at DeWitt Junior High School targeted minority classmates with racially-charged chants a day earlier, and at times locked arms to create a "wall," a nod to what President-elect Donald Trump has promised to build between Mexico and the United States.

Corina Gonzalez said that her seventh-grade daughter was targeted in one of the alleged incidents.

"She attempted to get to her locker, and there were some boys blocking the locker," she said. "And they were chanting things such as 'Donald Trump for president; let's build the wall; let's make America great again; you need to go back to Mexico.'"

Muslim students at the New York University's Tandon School of Engineering reported that someone vandalized their prayer room, scrawling "Trump!" across the front door, the Anti-Defamation League reported Thursday.

Meanwhile, the Loyal White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan in Pelham, N.C. announced on their web site that they will be holding a parade on Dec. 3 to celebrate Trump's victory.

In Chicago, as a few dozen young protesters gathered Thursday night near the Trump International Hotel and Tower, Black Lives Matter activist Lamon Reccord, 17, said that he was hopeful that Trump's victory would mark a political awakening for Millenials, who showed less support for Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton than they did for Obama four years ago. Clinton beat Trump 54% to 37% among voters ages 18 to 29, while Obama beat Mitt Romney 60% to 37% four years ago, according to CNN exit polls.

"This is something that is waking up the young," Reccord said. "It should not have taken Donald Trump to get this generation going."

Rudy Giuliani, a top Trump surrogate, dismissed the thousands of anti-Trump protesters that have taken to the street as “a bunch of spoiled cry-babies."

"Calm down, things are not as bad as you think," Giuliani said of the protesters in a Fox & Friends interview Thursday

Demonstrations were underway in Columbus, Milwaukee, Minneapolis and elsewhere Thursday evening, the day after thousands of protesters took to the streets in more than a dozen cities to speak out against Trump’s victory.

Protests in Wisconsin's state capital of Madison and Milwaukee, the state's most populous city, drew some of the biggest crowds Thursday, with more than 1,000 demonstrators taking to streets in both cities.

Voters and civil rights activists who oppose the president-elect say they plan to continue to express their outrage even as Trump and his team have begun working on their White House transition. Trump, who acidly ridiculed President Obama throughout his campaign and for years questioned whether the president was even born in the U.S., met with Obama at the White House on Thursday. Dozens of anti-Trump protesters gathered outside the White House as the two met.

"He will be our president," said NAACP President Cornell William Brooks. "We as civil rights leaders . . . we're quite willing to stand by his side in support of policies that speak to the values of the country. But we're also willing to stand in his face and in the face of this administration, if they violate core American precepts."

During the demonstrations, which have been largely peaceful, protesters lashed out against Trump, taking him to task for controversial comments he made about women, minorities, immigrants and Muslims while campaigning.

Some held signs declaring Trump “Not My President” and vowed to speak out against the Republican throughout his time in office.

Some demonstrators say they still hold on to a thread of hope that Trump will hear their voices and choose to not take office, or will be impeached after he takes office.

Not cool. @POTUS or Hillary should address. 'People Have to Die': Anti-Trump Protester Calls For Violence on CNN https://t.co/NfEqhkrTvu — Kellyanne Conway (@KellyannePolls) November 10, 2016

But many say they are simply trying to send the message that Trump’s sometimes incendiary rhetoric does not reflect their views, and that they plan to hold him accountable.

“What we are trying to say is Donald Trump is not the right person to serve as president, and we do not support anything he says or does,” said Erick Bellomy, 21, one of the organizers of a protest in Columbus. “Trump may become President of the United States, but we know in our hearts that he is not worthy of being the president.”

White House press secretary Josh Earnest said Thursday that the protesters were practicing their constitutional right to free speech.

“The president believes that’s a right that should be protected, it is a right that should be exercised without violence,” Earnest said. “There are people who are disappointed.”

More than 1,000 high school students in San Francisco walked out of class Thursday morning and marched through the city to express their disapproval of Trump. Several hundred students walked out of class in Oxnard, Calif, about 30 miles south of Los Angeles. In Phoenix, more than 200 students at two high schools held walkouts. Meanwhile, 50 to 75 private school students in Washington, D.C. left school early, with administrators blessings, and marched on Trump International Hotel.

"We're doing it for our futures," said 14-year-old Kevin Espinosa, who took part in the Phoenix protests.

"The future is black and brown, the future is queer and trans.... We are the future." -MSU College Dems President Dan Eggerding pic.twitter.com/8jrLWXOeDz — Olivia Dimmer (@DimmerOlivia) November 10, 2016

College campus were also buzzing.

More than 1,000 Michigan State University students gathered to take part in a protest organized by the university's College Democrats chapter. At the University of Tennessee, hundreds of students gathered on the Knoxville campus Thursday, chanting “Love Trumps Hate” and holding homemade signs to express their anger over the election results.

A smaller group of Trump backers holding their own signs and wearing campaign T-shirts in support of the president-elect stood at the edge of the demonstration.

Dalton Teel, a sophomore and anti-Trump demonstrator, directly addressed the Trump backers.

"This is to all the Trump supporters on the outskirts who say this protest is inconvenient. Do you know what's inconvenient? Being black on this campus,” Teel said. "Do you know what's inconvenient? Being gay on this campus. Do you know what's inconvenient? Being Muslim on this campus."

Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Raw: Second Night of NYC Anti-Trump Protests | 1:50 For a second night in New York City, hundreds of protesters spoke out against President-elect Donald Trump. (Nov. 11) AP 1 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Raw: Police, protesters clash in Portland | 1:43 Portland, Oregon police fired rubber baton rounds into a small crowd of remaining protesters that refused to disperse after an anti-Donald Trump demonstration. Some people were arrested. (Nov. 11) AP 2 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Raw: Riot at Portland, Oregon anti-Trump protest | 1:19 Multiple news outlets report that Portland, Oregon police detained several people at an anti-Trump protest turned riot after protesters broke out the windows of businesses and started a dumpster fire in Portland's downtown Pearl District. (Nov. 11) AP 3 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Portland, Oregon Police Try to Disperse Protesters | 1:13 Portland, Oregon police used flash-bangs some sort of smoke or tear gas to force people to disperse, after anti-Trump protests turned violent on Thursday night. (Nov. 11) AP 4 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Emotional reaction to Donald Trump's 2016 election | 2:35 Supporters of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump gathered at the White House as election results rolled in on Tuesday. Jarrad Henderson, USA TODAY 5 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA People protest against Donald Trump in NY | 0:56 People take part in a protest against President-elect Donald Trump in front of Trump Tower in New York. Video provided by AFP Newslook 6 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA New Yorkers vent Trump anger on subway Post-it notes | 1:18 New York commuters are venting anger and frustration over Donald Trump's shock victory by indulging in collective therapy -- writing messages on Post-it notes and sticking them on a subway wall. Video provided by AFP Newslook 7 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Raw: Thousands in New York march against Trump | 0:54 Thousands of protesters marched in Manhattan and converged outside Trump Tower to denounce the election of Donald Trump to the presidency. Police say dozens of people were arrested. (Nov. 10) AP 8 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA These Chicagoans refuse to unite for a Donald Trump presidency | 2:06 Protesters formed a wall outside Trump Tower in Chicago to voice their concern over a Donald Trump presidency. Video provided by Newsy Newslook 9 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Trump election win prompts protests across US | 1:22 Thousands of protesters rally across the United States expressing shock and anger over Donald Trump's election, vowing to oppose divisive views they say helped the Republican billionaire win the presidency. Video provided by AFP Newslook 10 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Protests erupt after Trump is elected | 0:53 Protests erupted throughout the United States and even across the Atlantic Ocean after Donald Trump was elected president. USA TODAY 11 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Donald Trump's victory sparked protests across the country | 0:38 Protests against Donald Trump's presidential victory sprung up across the U.S. Newslook 12 of 13 Skip in Skip x Embed x Share CLOSE TRUMP PROTESTS FLARE UP ACROSS THE USA Twitter users protest Trump presidency with Twitter blackout | 0:56 Twitter users are protesting President elect Donald Trump by making this simple black screen their profile picture. Josh King has the story (@abridgetoland). Buzz60 13 of 13 Last VideoNext Video Raw: Second Night of NYC Anti-Trump Protests

Raw: Police, protesters clash in Portland

Raw: Riot at Portland, Oregon anti-Trump protest

Portland, Oregon Police Try to Disperse Protesters

Emotional reaction to Donald Trump's 2016 election

People protest against Donald Trump in NY

New Yorkers vent Trump anger on subway Post-it notes

Raw: Thousands in New York march against Trump

These Chicagoans refuse to unite for a Donald Trump presidency

Trump election win prompts protests across US

Protests erupt after Trump is elected

Donald Trump's victory sparked protests across the country

Twitter users protest Trump presidency with Twitter blackout

Contributing: USA TODAY's Eliza Collins, USA TODAY College correspondent Olivia Dimmer, Lansing State Journal reporter Christopher Haxel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinal reporters Jesse Garza and James B. Nelson, and the Knoxville News Sentinel

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/2fhK3V7