When activists needed advice on disrupting Republican lawmakers' hometown events this month, they turned to Hugh Espey, a self-taught master in the art of political bird-dogging.

Espey, an Iowa social-justice activist, has been haranguing politicians at public events for four decades. He's like a Jedi knight when it comes to needling, cajoling and provoking on-the-record policy statements from lawmakers who, in his mind, have lost sight of Americans' needs.

The work is grinding and can go unnoticed. But there are big-game triumphs. Like the time he and fellow members of the Iowa Citizens for Community Improvement hounded Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney into blurting at the Iowa State Fair in 2011 that "corporations are people" — a remark that shadowed him for the remainder of the campaign.

Related: Lawmakers Pressed on Trump’s Policies at Town Halls

Despite his confrontational persona, Espey, a Bernie Sanders supporter who calls himself a "populist with a heart," seems uncomfortable with being held up as a bird-dogging guru.

People react to Rep. Jason Chaffetz as he speaks during a town hall meeting at Brighton High School, Feb. 9, 2017, in Cottonwood Heights, Utah. Rick Bowmer / AP

"It's not rocket science," he said in an interview. "It's common sense. What's bothering you? Are other people feeling the same way? Who are they? How do you g et them involved? What do you want? And who can give you what you want?"

The protests were already underway — including a highly charged confrontation with Rep. Jason Chaffetz of Utah — when a coalition of leftist advocacy groups led by MoveOn reached out to Espey for help. Members of both houses of Congress were heading back to their home districts on a week-long recess, and many would be holding town halls to speak with constituents. They wanted him to do a quick training session for more than 40,000 activists who'd be listening to a weekly organizing call.

"Bird-dogging," Espey told them, "means you get to speak out and fight back with other like-minded folks. It's liberating. And actually, in fact, when you bird-dog you may be called a heckler. And that's OK."

His tips: prepare pointed questions, bring several people, spread out in the audience, ask the questions repeatedly, create tension, attract attention, take video, and talk to the media.