Teenage protesters in the Los Angeles area voiced their opinion against president-elect Donald Trump Thursday morning by walking out of school and into the streets.

Franklin High School in Highland Park had a walk out at around 10:20 a.m.

Even Eagle Rock High School started to form a walkout at around 11 a.m.

Protests spilled out into the streets, including Figueroa.

A walkout at Manual Arts in South Los Angeles started at around 11 a.m.

RELATED Anti-Trump protests spread to Riverside, across U.S.

San Gabriel High School also protested. Students there said they were protesting on behalf of undocumented students.

About 150 Montclair High School students walked out of class at about 10:30 a.m. Thursday in protest of Donald Trump’s victory in the presidential election.

Students traveled east from Montclair High to Chaffey High. They tried to enter Chaffey but were locked out.

“While most students are protesting civilly, I have been informed that one student threw an orange at a Montclair police unit and some students have jumped onto the rear of an Ontario police truck,” Montclair police Chief Robert Avels said in an email.

• Video: Montclair High School students chant “dump Trump” and “not my president”

The protest is one of many in Southern California Thursday morning and across the nation, protesting Trump’s election. Social media feeds use the hashtag #NotMyPresident and students are yelling the same, as well as “Dump Trump!”

Chaffey Joint Union High School Superintendent Mat Holton is walking alongside the protestors and monitoring the situation.

He estimated the group’s size at 75.

“We have staff out here and police are out here,” said Holton who was on site with the students. “Everything has been calm so far.”

Students were given a chance to express themselves at Montclair High School and most returned to their classes, but some decided to walk out of school, he said.

If you know of any other high school protests, let us know by emailing social@scng.com

If you’re reading this on a mobile device, use this link for the full story.



