President Trump early Tuesday mocked Democrats for their Monday night protest at the Supreme Court, saying it was a “mess.”

"Nancy Pelosi and Fake Tears Chuck Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerThe omnibus is just the latest fiscal bomb to throw us off balance The Hill's 12:30 Report Female senators demand changes to workplace misconduct rules MORE held a rally at the steps of The Supreme Court and mic did not work (a mess)-just like Dem party!" Trump tweeted.

Nancy Pelosi and Fake Tears Chuck Schumer held a rally at the steps of The Supreme Court and mic did not work (a mess)-just like Dem party! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 31, 2017

ADVERTISEMENT

Congressional Democrats rallied Monday evening outside of the Supreme Court with thousands of supporters to urge Trump to rescind his executive order, which temporarily bans citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S.

Led by Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerThe omnibus is just the latest fiscal bomb to throw us off balance The Hill's 12:30 Report Female senators demand changes to workplace misconduct rules MORE (D-N.Y. ) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), the Democrats' protest at the foot of the Supreme Court was marred by a malfunctioning microphone, leaving a vast majority of the bulging crowd unable to hear a word of what the lawmakers were saying. A bullhorn was employed as an attempted remedy, but it failed to carry the message beyond those in closest proximity to the court steps.

Still, the protesters appeared undeterred. Waving signs, some held by young children propped on parents' shoulders, they chanted and sang throughout the event, hammering Trump's executive order as antithetical to American values and warning that they won't soon be silenced.

"This is what democracy looks like," they thundered repeatedly.

The crowd's numbers were in the hundreds minutes before 6 p.m., but swelled throughout the event as offices emptied and protestors — many of them federal employees — made their way to Capitol Hill. The police attempted to keep First Street NE open to traffic, but soon gave up as the crowd filled the road between the court and the Capitol.

Matt House, Schumer’s spokesman, said in a statement on Tuesday that Trump “should learn that name calling is not going to solve the many problems this administration has already brought upon itself.”

“He ought to repeal this un-American, poorly put-together and rushed executive order that makes America less safe and figure out a real way to stop terrorism,” House added.

“The mic briefly didn’t work, but this thin-skinned President clearly heard the voices of the more than 250 Members of Congress and thousands of others who gathered outside the Supreme Court last night,” Drew Hammill, a spokesman for Pelosi, said in a statement on Tuesday. “The President’s immoral executive order is clearly unconstitutional — no matter how many times he tweets or how many Administration officials he fires.”

Trump late Monday fired acting Attorney General Sally Yates after she refused to have the Justice Department defend his controversial executive order in court.

Multiple Democratic lawmakers have promised to introduce legislation to block the order. Schumer on Monday unsuccessfully attempted to force a vote on such legislation.

The order, which imposes a 90-day ban on nationals from Iran, Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Sudan, Libya and Somalia from entering the United States, caused protests throughout the country over the weekend as travelers were detained at multiple airports.

The order also includes a 120-day ban on admitting refugees and an indefinite halt on admitting refugees from war-torn Syria.

Mike Lillis and Mallory Shelbourne contributed to this report, which was updated at 9:46 a.m.