A YOUNG boy named Connor has become the (baby) face of the protests at Donald Trump’s inauguration in Washington DC.

Footage of the youngster speaking to Fox News reporter Griff Jenkins has been viewed 6.6 million times on Facebook.

Jenkins speaks to Connor over the dead embers of a fire.

“This fire was started, in fact this young man, you were participating in the fire, what’s your name?” asks Jenkins.

“Ah, my name’s Connor and I actually kind of started this fire,” says the proud-as-punch kid.

“So why’d you start that fire, Carter?” asks Jenkins.

“Ah ... it’s Connor,” he responds.

“Carter, sorry, why’d you start that fire?” repeats the reporter, as a dumbfounded Connor shakes his head before responding:

“Because I felt like it and because I’m just saying SCREW OUR PRESIDENT.”

“Okay well there you have it,” concludes the reporter.

The video has been shared 80,000 times and responses have been mixed.

‘This is what happens when you don’t discipline your kids,” said one angry commenter.

“Horrible parenting! Should be in bed and parents in jail,” agreed another.

Other people voiced their support for Connor when they shared the clip on their own pages.

“Haha gold. Start the fire. Go Connor!” said one Facebook user.

The other protester going viral is this woman, who made her feelings about Trump being sworn in clear:

Other protesters threw flares, threw rocks and smashed windows as the new President was sworn in, with police using pepper-spray and smoke bombs going off near the Capitol.

Some chanted “f*** police” and “Who do you serve, who do you protect?” at the line of officers blocking the street.

Just around the corner from where peaceful demonstrations were taking place in McPherson Square, clashes between police and protesters turned serious as the sun started to go down.

Bricks, water bottles and other objects were thrown at the riot squad, who responded by deploying tear gas and flash bangs at the crowd, forcing them to disperse.

Several in the crowd shouted for medics after getting sprayed in the face and were attended to as they lay prone on the ground.

Hours after the ceremony, demonstrations are still in full swing, with thousands gathering to rally against Donald Trump’s policies.

“My friends, this is a s*** show!” filmmaker Michael Moore shouted across the square into the microphone.

“Welcome to the s*** show!” the fired up crowd called back.

Thousands of middle fingers are being raised to the sky each time a helicopter flies overhead during the demonstrations, just in case it’s President Trump departing in his private chopper.

As the 45th president of the US, protesters stormed checkpoints close to the police blockades and hurled rocks. Anti-Trump protesters smashed in windows of a Starbucks next to Hamilton Hotel, a McDonald’s, a Bank of America branch and a bus stop.

More than 200 people were arrested in connection with the protests, said D.C Interim Police Chief Peter Newsham, many of which turned violent causing “significant damage to a number of blocks in our city.”

Those fighting for LGBT rights, women’s rights, members of the Black Lives Matter Movement, families and small children gathered during the inaugural parade, undeterred by the rain, with some even climbing up trees and lamp posts to get a better view.

“Do not despair, do not give up ... this is our country, we have to do this,” said Moore to rapturous applause.

“We need new leadership, new blood,” he said, declaring, “This is the beginning of the 100 days of resistance.

“I’m telling you, Donald Trump will not last these four years.”

Earlier in the day, the award-winning filmmaker tweeted a photo of himself from outside the inauguration ceremony, which he called “a tragedy for democracy”.

Mr Newsham said it was “a very small percentage” of the thousands who descended upon the nation’s capital to have their voice heard today.

A Washington Post reporter was thrown to the ground by riot police in the mayhem while attempting to video the arrest of anti-Trump protesters, The Intercept reports.

Crowd members yelled, “F*** NBC”, F*** mainstream media”, at another journalist, tweeted BuzzFeed reporter Zoe Tillman.

Protesters with hands up, smoke bomb just went off pic.twitter.com/Bgdge5q1q5 — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

Police pepper spray protester, others yell at him to stop resisting pic.twitter.com/pddhiHV6cs — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

Police face protesters at 12th and L, heavy pepper spray, police pushing everyone into a group pic.twitter.com/oFYud6gBOm — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

Mr Newsham confirmed some protesters threw rocks and overturned rubbish bins, smashed windows at a bank, cafes and car windscreens. Those arrested have been charged with rioting, police said.

One officer was injured as he was struck by an object during a protest, Doug Buchanan, spokesman for the D.C Fire and Emergency Medical Services said. Authorities said two other officers were injured, one by pepper spray and another falling off a bicycle.

The crowd had been assembling since the crack of dawn in downtown Washington, hauling signs that read, “Putin’s orange puppet,” “Reject, Resist,” and “Send Pence back to Azkaban”, among others. Some even held signs with President Trump’s face obscured by a swastika.

?rel=0

Buoyed by leaders wearing all black and screaming chants of “Not my president!”, “Black lives matter!”, “This is our right!” and “F*** that wall!” into megaphones, the protesters tore through the streets, attempting to get as close to the Capitol as possible.

By late morning, many of the peaceful protests had descended into chaos, with the windows of several parked cars and shopfronts being smashed in and officers in riot gear deploying pepper spray. Some were carrying hammers and other tools to shatter the glass.

A number of protesters appeared to have been sprayed in the face and looked visibly distressed, their eyes burning red. Some were dragged away from access points by multiple police. Several have been arrested, according to police.

Thousands protesting in the streets right now while the #Inauguration takes place just a few blocks away. @newscomauHQ pic.twitter.com/TToK4MxjLg — Charlotte Willis (@lottiewillis) January 20, 2017

The contrast between the disarray on the streets and the calm of the formal ceremony taking place just a few blocks away is evident in the extraordinary and dramatic images that have emerged on social media throughout the day.

Large flash bangs went off as police tried to corral the protesters, who raised their hands in the air. Others pushed over rubbish bins, set fire to bins and chanted, “Whose streets? Our streets” and “resistance starts here.”

Demonstrators blocked men in Air Force uniforms at one checkpoint, chanting, “The checkpoint is closed! The checkpoint is closed!,” according to video shared on social media.

Protesters smash windows of Bank of America, police moving in pic.twitter.com/lJZDQSwagB — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

Protesters just smashed the windows of this limo, threw in a flare pic.twitter.com/KMeXIbzBHH — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

Police spraying something at protesters pic.twitter.com/yeT0iYVgqL — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

Better shot of the pink smoke pic.twitter.com/KR33j8Vl33 — Zoe Tillman (@ZoeTillman) January 20, 2017

As ceremonies were under way, demonstrators ran through the streets near the Capitol, busting in windows at the historic Hamilton Crowne Plaza near McPherson Square, witnesses told The New York Post.

“Basically protesters came through. That’s all I can really say because we were locking it down,” said a Hamilton hotel employee.

A witness called Janet, who saw the tail-end of the chaos, said: “They came out here. They smashed this window,” adding cops were “tear-gassing them.”

“[Cops] had the protesters up against a building,” her husband added.

“We got maced,” said a demonstrator with a reddened face and teary eyes.

Another protester who refused to give her name told the Post: “We’re kind of resisting fascism just like everybody else …[The teargas] is kind of unwarranted.”

They denied having any involvement in the smashing of the windows.