Peaceful anti-Trump demonstration, march directed at Union Square shoppers









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});













Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 1 of / 10 Caption Close Image 1 of 10 Alexis Manzanilla (center) joins protesters in Union Square during a march against President Trump. Alexis Manzanilla (center) joins protesters in Union Square during a march against President Trump. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 2 of 10 Quayshion Smith (left) and Alexis Moore carry a banner while leading demonstrators on a March against President Trump on Market Street. Quayshion Smith (left) and Alexis Moore carry a banner while leading demonstrators on a March against President Trump on Market Street. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 3 of 10 Protesters rally against President Trump in Union Square. Protesters rally against President Trump in Union Square. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 4 of 10 Protesters against President Donald Trump march down Powell St. in San Francisco on Saturday, Nov. 4, 2017. Protesters against President Donald Trump march down Powell St. in San Francisco on Saturday, Nov. 4, 2017. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 5 of 10 Image 6 of 10 John from Mountain View, who declined to give a last name, joins more than a hundred protesters against President Donald Trump marching down Market St. in San Francisco on Saturday, Nov. 4, 2017. John from Mountain View, who declined to give a last name, joins more than a hundred protesters against President Donald Trump marching down Market St. in San Francisco on Saturday, Nov. 4, 2017. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 7 of 10 Andrea Fuentes and Ryan Jenkins join protesters rallying against President Trump in Union Square. Andrea Fuentes and Ryan Jenkins join protesters rallying against President Trump in Union Square. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 8 of 10 Advocating for detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Curt Wechsler joins protesters rallying against President Trump in Union Square. Advocating for detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Curt Wechsler joins protesters rallying against President Trump in Union Square. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 9 of 10 Protesters are seen through a cable car’s windows during a march against President Trump. Protesters are seen through a cable car’s windows during a march against President Trump. Photo: Noah Berger, Special To The Chronicle Image 10 of 10 Peaceful anti-Trump demonstration, march directed at Union Square shoppers 1 / 10 Back to Gallery

About 200 protesters of President Trump — joined by scores of police officers — held a noisy rally and march from Union Square on Saturday afternoon, starting next to a giant Christmas tree and holiday ice skating rink, with confused tourists watching the show.

“I don’t have any illusions that we’ll impeach the president,” said Dwight Ost, 65, of San Francisco’s Noe Valley. “But I want to bring light on this issue to people who are out here shopping.”

Ost held a cardboard sign that said, “Dump the Chump.”

LATEST SFGATE VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing Woman hit by Sacramento sheriff's deputy vehicle during Stephon Clark protest Guy Danilowitz

The wettest and driest places in the Bay Area Ted Andersen, Alix Martichoux, SFGATE

The Regulars: The Mushroom Hacker Nani Walker, Robin Simmonds and Lauren Schwartzman

Candy Land: How West Oakland's Ocho Candy Makes Its Organic Sweet Treats Sarah Fritsche

Bernal Heights hit-and-run San Francisco Chronicle

Woman's car plunges 300 feet off cliff near Pacifica California Highway Patrol

SF Brewing Co. Ghirardelli Square Virtual Tour San Francisco Chronicle

The story behind You're Going to Die, SF's death-related open mike San Francisco Chronicle

Protesting the death of Stephon Clark: ‘You murdered a Son’ New York Times

David Nayfeld making pasta San Francisco Chronicle

The peaceful event, one of several around the country Saturday, was sponsored by an organization called Refuse Facism. It began at 3 p.m. with speeches and chants loud enough to drown out a small handful of Trump supporters, including Amber Cummings, who organized a chaotic anti-Marxist rally in Berkeley in August.

Though Cummings and others tried to interrupt Saturday’s rally, they were outnumbered. Organizers kept the focus on Trump and managed to avoid the confrontations that have come to define protests in Oakland and Berkeley.

At about 4 p.m., the group embarked on a long, rambling march to BART’s 24th Street Mission Station. The marchers took up about half a block and proceeded up Market Street with a large contingent of police vans and motorcycles trailing behind.

Using a jury-rigged sound system atop a dolly, organizers led chants and drew cheers from bystanders outside the Orpheum Theatre. They stopped briefly in front of the Twitter building at 10th and Market streets to commemorate a rogue departing employee who shut down Trump’s account for 11 minutes Thursday. A couple of dozen protesters lay down briefly at the intersection of 16th and Market streets.

Some bystanders greeted the crowd with approval, but many shrugged.

“It’s pretty cool, but they are preaching to the choir around here,” said James Frame, 73, of the Mission District, who happened to be shopping at Safeway in the Castro when the protester ambled by.

“It’s great to see this, but in San Francisco everybody already feels this way,” said Rob Marsee, 29, who was standing outside a smoke shop in the Castro when the march went by.

Marsee, who is originally from Indiana, said his family in the Midwest voted for Trump.

The crowd started to thin as it veered through Noe Valley, past Dolores Park and down 18th Street toward the Mission, culminating at the BART station. Organizers from Refuse Facism remained upbeat, shouting in Spanish.

They will convene again at the 24th Street Mission BART station Tuesday afternoon, organizers promised.

Rachel Swan is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: rswan@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @rachelswan