An unnecessary arrest met its fitting conclusion Monday morning: My disorderly conduct charge for covering a Trump protest in Manhattan, the night after Election Day, was dismissed after two city court appearances.

This would be more encouraging if the intervening four months did not suggest that crackdowns on press and protesters — and the chances of defending the First Amendment and defeating charges in court — are only getting worse.

When I was hauled off to Central Booking with about a dozen others less than 24 hours after Trump took the American electorate, we saw as an all-too-literal warning of what would happen to any opposition once he took power. Little did we know that, in that earliest disturbance of Trump's America, we were getting off easy.

Journalists who were arrested at Trump's inauguration — where I was pepper-sprayed by police but at least didn't get handcuffed — are facing up to 10 years in prison and a $25,000 fine for felony riot charges.

Police in riot gear arrest Dakota Access pipeline protesters

Emotions run high as main Dakota Access Pipeline protest camp evacuated

Reporters arrested at Standing Rock demonstrations in North Dakota are still battling pre-Trump charges, but recent developments — such as Trump swiftly reviving Dakota Access Pipeline construction, while those charged journalists are still just waiting to get their equipment back — indicate that the legal battles will simply drag on and the arrests will keep coming.

All of these events also led to the arrests of hundreds of civilians who do not have media outlets to tell their stories, pay their bills or promote them as First Amendment freedom fighters.

Meanwhile, Republican lawmakers in about 20 states have introduced bills which, in one way or another, would spike punishments for protesters.

Raymond Kingfisher, 59, of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, at a march against the Dakota Access oil pipeline. Reporters arrested at Standing Rock are still battling pre-Trump charges. (TERRAY SYLVESTER/REUTERS)

An Indiana bill would authorize law enforcement to "use any means necessary" to clear demonstrations obstructing traffic. Bills in Tennessee and North Dakota would make it okay for drivers to hit and kill protesters in streets — as long as they can prove it wasn't intentional.

Navy vet who aided Standing Rock protesters now an arson suspect

All of these are big, obvious signs of the culture of fear and the oncoming crackdowns that will cripple First Amendment rights of protesters and those covering them. But before those rights are crumbled, they will be chipped away in the little details.

The complaint filed against me by the NYPD is a perfect example. My arresting officer wrote that he "instructed defendant to get onto the sidewalk and informed him that would be arrested if they did not comply" (sic). It claims that a group of about 20 people trying to get out of a nearby subway stop "were unable to get around the defendant and the others he was with."

People chant outside of Trump Tower on 5th Ave. on Nov. 9. Most of the people arrested during protests did not have the resources to keep coming to court for a dismissal. (Chase Gaewski/for New York Daily News)

Not only are these details false; they are provably false, because I was filming all of this on Facebook Live, and none of that happened. But we've seen in the past few months that demonstrable facts don't carry the weight we once reasonably expected them to.

Most of the people whom I was arrested with did not have the resources to keep coming to court for a dismissal. If I didn't work for a major media organization, I, too, likely would have been forced to accept blatant mistruths about my action. Even with my dismissal, this little squabble cost much time and much money.

Keystone XL Pipeline exempt from Trump’s ‘Buy American' policy

One lesson: Film everything you can. It guarantees, if nothing else, that when it is your word against the police or the politicians, you will have already made your statement.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!