Recent political demonstrations have had people skipping work, protesting at major cities and airports — and running to the store for office supplies.

The latest high-profile event was “A Day Without A Woman,” pegged to International Women’s Day urging women around the world to take the day off from work, abstain from shopping and show their solidarity by wearing red. The Women’s March in January, however, had a big effect on office supplies. The Women’s March took place in Washington, D.C. the day after Trump’s inauguration, with a turnout of hundreds of thousands of attendees defending women, immigrants and LGBTQ’s rights.

Americans spent $4.1 million on poster and foam boards from Jan. 15 to Jan. 21 ($2.2 million for poster boards and $1.9 for foam) in the run-up to President Trump’s inauguration and the subsequent protests, according to research firm NPD Group. That rose to $6 million when you account for paint markers, easel pads, flip charts, fabric paint, staple guns, plier staplers, and other specialty craft products related to signs.

One slice of the economy that benefited from all these homemade signs and T-shirts: sellers of office supplies, NPD said. Poster boards were up 33% week over week and paint marker purchases rose 35% in the same time. Fabric paint sales were up at least three times as much in the week before the march, compared with weeks in January.

Protests have occurred with consistent frequency in recent months, especially after Donald Trump claimed the presidency in November. For days after the election, both around the U.S. and the world, protesters marched with homemade signs that said things like “Love Trumps Hate” and “Not My President.” Pro-Trump signs included the president’s campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again.”

See: Unhappy with the election’s outcome? Here’s another way to protest

There was also the “Day Without Immigrants,” a nationwide demonstration on Feb. 16, in which small businesses closed and immigrants took off from work. About 100 employees around the U.S. lost their jobs after the demonstration for not coming into work, according to the Atlantic. Pro-immigrant protests also occurred at the end of January, after President Trump’s executive order banning immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim countries from entering or returning to the U.S.