While the clashes occurred, thousands of peaceful protesters marched across the country as they voiced anti-Trump slogans. In New York, seven people were arrested when they blocked the sidewalk outside Trump Tower.

Protesters in San Francisco formed a blockade across train tracks, leading to eight arrests, and chained themselves to the downtown offices of Uber and Wells Fargo. In the central business district of Portland, Ore., banks, clothing retailers and a jewelry store boarded up windows and covered walls to limit vandalism. Chants in English and Spanish broke out in front of the Capitol in Phoenix.

“This is one of the darkest days in the history of our country,” said Adelle Wallace, 75, during a rain-soaked march in Los Angeles.

The violence in Washington began about an hour before Mr. Trump was sworn in at noon. Storefront windows at a Bank of America and a Starbucks several blocks from the parade route were smashed, leading to many arrests.

Video

Around 2 p.m., as Mr. Trump ate lunch on Capitol Hill with lawmakers and supporters, the protests expanded and turned violent. Protesters hurled rocks and bricks at police officers several blocks from the parade route. Officers with helmets and riot shields tried to disperse the protesters by using flash grenades and pepper spray.

After being pushed back a block, protesters outside the Washington Post building lit a fire in the middle of the street, smashed the windows of a limousine and then lit it on fire. The police, using more flash grenades, cleared a path for fire trucks as protesters retreated to a park.

The violence attracted a throng of onlookers, journalists and peaceful protesters who had marched earlier in the day.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Reed Arahood, 34, of Massachusetts, who had come to Washington to be part of the peaceful protests, said she was ambivalent about the violence.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I don’t think I have words to accurately describe how I feel about them,” she said about the protesters. She added that she felt “solidarity” but also was “absolutely” concerned about the image of violent protests.

But over all the scene of thousands of protesters gave her hope.

“I feel pretty proud of the number who showed up today,” she said. “Looking strangers in the eye and knowing that we’re together and talking with people from all over the country who have come here to express their concerns about what is going to happen in the next four years and what is already happening in our country. I feel really good about that.”

Video

Along several access points to view the inauguration, the protesters hoped simply to put themselves in the way, locking arms, forming human blockades in front of both public and ticketed entrances. The police directed attendees around the corners of blockades, sometimes in single file, forcing some ticketed attendees to wait nearly an hour in line to trickle past the protests.

Content with their success disrupting the flow of attendees, about 150 protesters gathered downtown in McPherson Square, breaking off in groups to march along I Street. An organizer advised two dozen people on the day’s aims: to disrupt Mr. Trump’s celebration as much as possible — an objective, he predicted, that would rankle “mainly police officers and Trump supporters.”

“Police officers,” a woman in the crowd grumbled, “are Trump supporters.”

A few attendees drummed on buckets, nodding at the instructions. Some wondered about divine intervention as the day turned rainy. “It’s the earth crying about the climate-denial president,” said Elodie Huttner, 52.

Rallies have been planned all over the country all weekend, cresting with a women’s march in Washington on Saturday.

Despite the disruptions, some in Washington were able to find moments of normalcy.

Molly Schwizer, 52, a government employee who had the day off, left the quiet neighborhood in northwestern Washington where she lives to check out the chaotic and heavily policed streets of downtown, where protesters vied with Trump supporters.

“I wanted to see what this was all about,” she said, motioning toward Saks Off 5th, the discount branch of the New York department store. “And,” she added, “I had some shopping to do.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

By midafternoon, she had seen enough of the protesters (“they should clean up,” she said) and the Trump supporters (no comment — she does have a government job, after all). Also, it was raining — and so it was time to shop.