Despite a steady downpour of rain, thousands of people converged on Los Angeles City Hall Friday, joining a chorus of marchers across Southern California and the nation to protest the inauguration of Donald Trump.

Arriving first was a contingent of more than a hundred coming from Mariachi Plaza on downtown’s eastside, led by a large pick-up truck displaying a red banner that read in Spanish, “Legalization, Deferred Action, For the Whole Family, Equality!”

By 1 p.m., the crowd swelled to more than a thousand, with the arrival of marchers coming from the west. The group had assembled just after 11 a.m. at L.A. Live on Olympic Boulevard, where they carried signs and chanted “not my president.”

Despite the rain, they traveled about a couple miles down Broadway to get to City Hall, on Spring Street.

Some protesters came prepared for the weather with banners wrapped in plastic. Still, some marched with banners drenched by the rain.

Gabi Lizzoli, 34, of Hollywood, did one better, staying dry under a white umbrella painted with the words “united in peace, united in love, power to the people.”

Lizzoli was standing from a high perch near the City Hall steps looking out on to the crowd, which by then was a sea of other umbrellas.

The graphic designer and mom said that for her and many fellow demonstrators this was an “emotional” time.

“We are coming to have an outlet and to know that we are united against the hate, racism and misogyny that Trump stands for,” she said, not long after the newly inaugurated president told the nation that it is “now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and restore its promise for all of our people.”

• PHOTOS: Anti-Donald Trump march in the rain on Inauguration Day in Los Angeles

A Facebook page advertising the event as “United Against Hate — Inauguration March” showed more than 15,000 people had signed up to say they would take part in the march, though the numbers never seemed to hit that mark.

“This is an opportunity to show the administration, the country and the world that there are a litany of people in the United States … who are coming together to say we reject” Trump’s policies, said Anthony Rogers-Wright, one of the event’s organizers.

Eric Meyer, 35, said he “boycotted” the inauguration broadcast and also canceled the ecological theology class he was scheduled to teach at Loyola Marymount University to allow his students to attend the demonstrations if they wanted.

He said that he has “never lost so much sleep” being “worried about six or seven things at the same time.”

He was concerned about the fate of the healthcare system, the “white nationalist and racist” sentiments coming to the forefront in public culture, and policies that could give away public land to private interests for drilling, ranching or other profit-driven purposes.

The Westchester resident said he is raising a daughter, who is now 2-years-old.

“This is our world … this is her world now,” he said.

In addition to a large black bus with a digital sign reading “United Against Hate,” a supersized balloon shaped like Donald Trump clutching a white Ku Klux Klan hood, was wheeled through the crowd.

It was thefirst protest for 24-year-old John Lee, who followed closely behind the giant likeness of the newly inaugurated president.

The San Gabriel-born and Echo Park-raised Angeleno said he is usually “apolitical” and feels that perhaps Washington “isn’t going to pay attention or even care” about the many protests taking place around the country. But Lee said he felt moved to “show that L.A. overwhelmingly rejects Trump’s policies and administration.”

Others did, too, not long after Trump took the oath of office Friday.

Protesters clashed with police in D.C., where six police officers were reportedly injured and 217 protesters were arrested after smashing windows, damaging cars and throwing rocks at police, not far from Trump’s inauguration ceremony. In San Francisco, a crowd estimated at 3,500 formed a human chain along the sidewalk of the Golden Gate Bridge in solidarity. And across Southern California, there were anti-Trump rallies and marches in cities including Riverside, San Bernardino, Claremont and Santa Ana.

Protests were also reported in other locations closer to L.A., with a rally held in Leimert Park in South Los Angeles and groups doing pop-ups throughout the city.

• VIDEO: Anti-Trump march in downtown Los Angeles on Inauguration Day

In downtown Los Angeles, the march was peaceful, with no arrests, according to the LAPD.

The ranks of the protesters grew and shrank over the afternoon, with some officials estimating that as many as 2,500 people filled Spring Street in front of City Hall, and the rain cleared up at about 2 p.m.

Road closures were on a rolling basis, with traffic control officers managing the flow.

The marchers to City Hall included members of more than two dozen, politically progressive groups, including California for Progress, Union del Barrio, Food and Water Watch, the Bernie Sanders Brigade, Code Pink and National Lawyers Guild.

The organizers say they were demonstrating in the name of a variety of causes, including urging against “mass deportations,” the construction of “fossil fuel pipelines” and “systemic racism.”