Donald Trump, the presumptive GOP nominee for president, held a rally in Dallas Thursday night after hosting an invitation-only fundraiser earlier in the evening. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Donald Trump, the presumptive GOP nominee for president, held a rally in Dallas Thursday night after hosting an invitation-only fundraiser earlier in the evening.

About 3,000 people were in attendance for the rally at Gilley's South Side Ballroom, which was held on the one-year anniversary of his presidential campaign launch.

Donald Trump's Dallas Speech

Presumptive Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump addressed supporters at a campaign event at Gilley's South Side Ballroom on Thursday, June 16, 2016. (Published Friday, June 17, 2016)

Trump spent much of the rally recounting his victories during his party's hard-fought primary, offering a state-by-state recap.

"This is the one-year anniversary, and hopefully we're going to make it a worthwhile year," he said.

Trump Speech Reflects on One Year of Campaign

Donald Trump spoke in Dallas exactly one year after beginning his presidential campaign. His speech Thursday largely looked back at his successful primary year. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Trump did not mention by name one of his former rivals, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz – who won the Texas primary handily and has yet to endorse Trump.

Still, Trump promised a Texas-sized victory in November.

"We're going to win Texas so big, we're going to win Texas so big," he said.

Trump Rally in Dallas

A former Cruz supporter, U.S. Rep. Michael Burgess, R-Lewisville, was among those who spoke at the rally.

"I endorse the man, Donald Trump. I endorse what he stands for and to make America great again!" Burgess said.

Raw Video: Outside the Trump Rally in Dallas

Raw video shows protesters and police outside Gilley's Southside Ballroom where presumptive Republican candidate Donald Trump spoke at a rally on Thursday, June 16, 2016. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Trump joked about riding a mechanical bull at the rally – but seemed a little confused by the concept.

"I read about this place," Trump told the crowd. "Where's that horse?"

He appeared to be referring to the venue's mechanical bull. The original Gilley's and its bull were featured prominently in the 1980 movie "Urban Cowboy."

Trump predicted his ride would be a smash in the news.

"Hey, you want to hit the papers tomorrow? Let's get that horse. I'll ride that horse," said Trump. "The problem is, even if I make it, they'll say I fell off the horse and it was terrible."

Trump Supporters Cheer Candidate at Dallas Rally

Thousands of Donald Trump supporters arrived to cheer on their candidate at Gilley's South Side Ballroom in Dallas. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Trump was also inspired by a protester's cowboy hat and suggested selling a "Make America Great Again" version.

Trump told the crowd he expects winning the general election against likely rival Hillary Clinton in November to be more difficult than the primary because of what he perceived to be a dishonest press.

"You know, it's funny. I didn't love the press during the primaries, but now it's, like, brutal," Trump said.

Trump Mentions NBC 5 in Speech

During his speech at Gilley's South Side Ballroom on Thursday, presumptive Republican candidate Donald Trump mentioned NBC 5's coverage of his campaign. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

As the rally ended supporters from inside the venue began to mix with protesters who were gathered outside on South Lamar Street. Dozens of police officers, both on foot and on horseback, formed a line and guided the crowds away from Gilley's and into Downtown Dallas, where they dispersed.

Police Try to Separate Protesters, Supporters at Trump Rally

Dallas police worked to keep the peace as protesters mixed with supporters outside the Donald Trump rally at Gilley's South Side Ballroom. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

A Dallas Advocate photojournalist was treated for a head injury after he was struck by a rock thrown from the crowd.

Dallas police reported one arrest for disorderly conduct, and there were seven other people removed from the Trump rally while the candidate spoke.

In all, about 1,500 to 1,800 police officers worked during the Trump visit, either helping block and direct traffic along the motorcade route, or at the rally site.

Raw Video: How DPD Handled Supporters and Protesters

Raw video shows how Dallas police handled removing Trump supporters from a crowd of protesters outside Gilley's after the presumptive Republican presidential candidates spoke at a Rally Thursday, June 16, 2016. (WARNING: Possible foul language) (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Seven people were treated for heat-related illness, Dallas Fire-Rescue reported, with one person transported to a hospital. The temperature Thursday reached the mid-90s, with a heat index above 100 degrees.

After the rally, Trump's motorcade returned to the Hilton Dallas/Park Cities off Northwest Highway and the Dallas North Turnpike, where the candidate was expected to stay the night before traveling to Houston on Friday for a campaign event in The Woodlands.

Protestors Line Up at Trump Rally

Protesters gathered Thursday outside Gilley's South Side Ballroom in Dallas, where Donald Trump was due to hold a political rally. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Fundraiser for Trump

Prior to the rally at the South Side Ballroom, Trump attended a fundraiser at The Highland Hotel, at Mockingbird Lane and U.S. Highway 75.

Tickets ranged from $500 to $250,000, and organizers remained tight-lipped about the guest list and wouldn't say how many people were in attendance.

The email invitation urged North Texas Republicans to come together and unite as a party to support Trump as the presumptive nominee so they can take back the White House in November.

Trump Attends Dallas Fundraiser with Republican Donors

Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump attended a private fundraiser with Dallas County donors prior to Thursday's rally in Dallas. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

Dallas Police Prepare to Keep the Peace During Trump Rally

The South Side Ballroom, which is across the street from Dallas police headquarters, holds fewer than 4,000 people. Trump's rally at the American Airlines Center in Dallas last September drew more than 15,000 inside and several thousand protesters outside.

Police Presence at Trump Rally

Dallas police have hundreds of officers are working security for Donald Trump's rally. (Published Thursday, June 16, 2016)

In anticipation of large crowds converging at the smaller venue, Dallas police closed several blocks of South Lamar Street, from Cadiz Street to Belleview Street, beginning at 2 p.m.

Due to the recent history of clashes taking place at Trump rallies, the Dallas Police Department used Wednesday afternoon to practice crowd control and techniques in riot gear at Fair Park.

Dallas Police Practice Crowd Control Techniques

Ahead of Donald Trump's rally in Dallas Thursday, the Dallas Police Department practiced crowd control techniques in Fair Park Wednesday, June 15, 2016. (Published Wednesday, June 15, 2016)

Copyright Associated Press / NBC 5 Dallas-Fort Worth