Up to 100 protesters marched in downtown San Diego on Tuesday as part of a national attempt to start a weekly event called “Resist Trump Tuesdays.”

The protesters began the march around 12:30 p.m. from Front Street, visiting the San Diego offices of U.S. Sens. Kamala Harris and Dianne Feinstein. Harris’ office at 600 B St. is in the same building as The San Diego Union-Tribune.

San Diego Police said they escorted the crowd to mare sure they made it through intersections safely. There were roughly 60 people at the protest when it came to 600 B St., but police said the crowd was around 100 people when it ended at 2 p.m. at City Hall.

“The police were wonderful. They protected us as we crossed the street,” said Nancy Cohen, 65, of Encinitas.

Cohen said they wanted to thank Feinstein and Harris for their efforts and urge them to oppose the confirmation of agency nominees selected by President Donald Trump: Betsy DeVos for secretary of the Department of Education, Jeff Sessions for Attorney General, Steve Mnuchin for secretary of the Department of the Treasury and Scott Pruitt as administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.

Staff writer Pauline Repard contributed to this report.

RELATED

Protestors gathered to support the Affordable Care Act. Also to denounce Trump's Muslim ban and Steve Bannon's influence on Tuesday. Protestors gathered to support the Affordable Care Act. Also to denounce Trump's Muslim ban and Steve Bannon's influence on Tuesday. SEE MORE VIDEOS

Protesters gather at the San Diego International Airport to protest President Trump's travel ban. Protesters gather at the San Diego International Airport to protest President Trump's travel ban. SEE MORE VIDEOS

Participants met at the San Diego Civic Center Plaza in downtown San Diego and marched along the 1-mile route on Broadway to the County Administration Center. Participants met at the San Diego Civic Center Plaza in downtown San Diego and marched along the 1-mile route on Broadway to the County Administration Center. SEE MORE VIDEOS

phillip.molnar@sduniontribune.com (619) 293-1891 Twitter: @phillipmolnar

ALSO

Across the border in Tijuana, few worry about Trump’s wall