Bill Nye “The Science Guy” on Thursday tweeted a photo of himself at a protest outside the White House in favor of the Paris climate agreement.

“The demonstration began after today’s announcement,” he tweeted. “People are concerned about the lack of US leadership jeopardizing the whole planet.”

The demonstration began after today's announcement. People are concerned about the lack of US leadership jeopardizing the whole planet. pic.twitter.com/FScGD1qGzq — Bill Nye (@BillNye) June 1, 2017

ADVERTISEMENT

Nye, who hosts Netflix’s “Bill Nye Saves the World,” additionally criticized’s decision to remove the U.S. from the accord in a separate tweet.

“U.S. chooses not to stay in Paris accord,” he wrote. “The ‘Losers?’ Everyone on Earth. Sad.”

U.S. chooses not to stay in Paris accord. The “Losers?” Everyone on Earth. Sad. https://t.co/wYUB9OY7hM — Bill Nye (@BillNye) June 1, 2017

Protesters backing the Paris accord flocked to the White House gates on Thursday to demonstrate against Trump’s decision.

D.C.-based environmental group 350 DC announced the protest a day before Trump announced America’s formal withdrawal from the deal.

“In order to fulfill my solemn duty to protect America and its citizens, the United States will withdraw from the Paris climate accord,” Trump said at the White House Rose Garden.

“The bottom line is that the Paris accord is very unfair at the highest level to the United States. We are getting out, but we will start to negotiate and see if we can make deal that is fair.”

Trump, who is skeptical of the science behind climate change, added that deal impacted U.S. workers unfairly.

“The Paris climate accord is simply the latest example of Washington entering into an agreement that disadvantages the United States to the exclusive benefit of other countries, leaving American workers — who I love — and taxpayers to absorb the cost in terms of lost jobs, lower wages, shuttered factories and vastly diminished economic productions.”

The U.S. had pledged to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions 26 percent to 28 percent by 2025 as part of the nonbinding pact created in 2015.