MISCHIEVIOUS Nasa scientists have set up a rogue Twitter feed in protest at Donald Trump.

The space agency’s unofficial account already has 275,000 followers and is seen as a revolt against Trump’s alleged efforts to muzzle climate change organisations.

Splash News Donald Trump has been hit by a series of federal agencies setting up spoof accounts after environment agencies were warned to tone down their climate change rhetoric

We cannot allow Mr. Trump to silence the scientific community. We need peer-reviewed, evidence-based research MORE THAN EVER now. — Rogue NASA (@RogueNASA) January 25, 2017

How sad is it that government employees have to create rogue Twitter accounts just to communicate FACTS to the American public? — Rogue NASA (@RogueNASA) January 25, 2017

A description on the newly-opened @RogueNASA page reads: “The unofficial 'Resistance' team of NASA. Not an official NASA account."

It asks readers to follow its feed "for science and climate news and facts. REAL NEWS, REAL FACTS."

One of the account’s first messages took a clear dig at Trump.

related stories 'WATERBOARDING... IT WORKS!' Donald Trump on torture - what did he say, what is waterboarding and where are the CIA black site prisons? TRUMPTY DUMPTY Will Donald Trump's Mexico border wall ever be built? WHO IS DONALD'S 'ROBOCOP'? President Trump's bodyguard who sparked 'fake limbs' theory - here's what we know MEXICAN STAND-OFF Furious Mexican president says his country will NOT pay for border wall after Trump insists Mexico will fork out 100% and construction will start IMMEDIATELY REINVENTING NATO Trump & PM summit to be dominated by security talks as he seeks support to overhaul 'obsolete' NATO

It posted: “We cannot allow Mr. Trump to silence the scientific community. We need peer-reviewed, evidence-based research MORE THAN EVER now.”

Another added: "How sad is it that government employees have to create rogue Twitter accounts just to communicate FACTS to the American public?"

Nasa is the latest in a series of federal agencies having rogue Twitter accounts set up on their behalf by anonymous employees.

Scientists at the Environmental Protection Agency were the first to do so, launching an account after the body was told to tone down the information it releases to the public about climate change.

The account has already picked up nearly 275,000 followers

In the days following his election, Trump declared “environmentalism is out of control”.

An account dubbed @ungaggedEPA invited followers to visit its feeds of "ungagged news, links, tips and conversation that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is unable to tell you," adding that it was "Not directly affiliated with @EPA."

At least 14 ‘rogue’ Twitters accounts have since been launched on behalf of US federal agencies.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368