As hundreds of thousands of Egyptians crammed into dueling rallies in different parts of Cairo on Friday, responding to calls for support from rival political factions around the army and the Muslim Brotherhood, activists who mistrust both the military and the Islamists were left wondering how best to register their disgust.

With Tahrir Square packed with flag-waving supporters of the defense minister, Gen. Abdul-Fattah el-Sisi, and a rally outside the Rabaa al-Adawiya mosque across town calling for the reinstatement of the deposed Islamist president, Mohamed Morsi, many dissenters avoided the streets and mocked both sides from afar online.

The activist filmmaker Aalam Wassef, who made subversive Web videos during the Mubarak era under the pseudonym Ahmad Sherif, released a bleakly comic music video that showed him sitting out Friday’s demonstrations at home, doing his laundry in front of a banner with a single word on it: “Resist.”

The song’s lyrics summed up the topsy-turvy sense of a world turned sideways and then upside down, scrambling the positions taken by three groups during Egypt’s 2011 revolution — the revolutionaries; the “felool,” or “remnants” of the regime of Hosni Mubarak; and the “Couch Party,” made up of citizens who watch political disputes unfold on television. “Today the revolutionaries are members of the Couch Party,” Mr. Wassef’s collaborator Mariam K. sings, “the Brotherhood are felool and the felool are playing revolutionaries.” And that, Mr. Wassef chimes in, is “the surreal story of Egypt.”

Another dissident, Omar Robert Hamilton — a leader of the Mosireen media collective, which grew out of an effort to document the 2011 revolution — wrote on Twitter that he had visited Tahrir Square to collect five minutes of footage for the archive, but found “the blind uniformity of this nationalism” extremely depressing.

Number of hipsters in Tahrir today = 0 — Omar Robert Hamilton (@ORHamilton) 26 Jul 13

Mr. Hamilton also drew attention to ironic contrasts he noticed on the streets on Friday, like Egyptian soldiers deployed next to a mural dedicated to the activist Mina Daniel, who was killed by troops during the notorious Maspero massacre of mainly Coptic Christian protesters in late 2011, when Egypt was under direct military rule.

Volunteers from Tahrir Bodyguard, a group set up to protect female protesters from sexual assault during demonstrations in the square, posted an alert on Twitter saying that they would not be present on Friday.

Our teams will not be in ground in Tahrir Square today, July the 26th.

Wishing all the safety to our women and men out there. — Tahrir Bodyguard (@TahrirBodyguard) 26 Jul 13

A small number of activists did take to the streets, however, displaying banners in Sphinx Square with red lines through the faces of both General Sisi and Mr. Morsi.

via @sharifkouddous Small protest in Sphinx #ThirdSquare against both the army and the Muslim Brotherhood #Egypt //t.co/x3Inz3eN2v — Ahdaf Soueif (@asoueif) 26 Jul 13

Some sense in Sphinx Sq… Opposing the army, mb and Felool. //t.co/n0ARogmFtU — أبو كار (@Sarahcarr) 26 Jul 13

As the Egyptian-British blogger Sarah Carr reported for Mada Masr, an English-language news site, the dozens of protesters in Sphinx Square “refer to their movement as ‘The Third Square.’ ”

In a leaflet distributed in the protest they describe themselves as “a group of Egyptians who protested on January 25 against the corruption of the Mubarak state … protested against [the former head of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein] Tantawi’s men, who gave the army a bad name during the transitional period, and protested against Morsi and religious fascism in order to call for early elections.” The leaflet says that they are protesting today against the army playing a role in politics and against “the defense minister calling for an authorization to kill Egyptians on the pretext of fighting terrorism when fighting terrorism does not require a mandate because that is the duty of the Armed Forces.”

One protester, Marwa Ibrahim, told Ms. Carr: “I refused the June 30 coup not because I loved Morsi but because it was a violation of revolutionary legitimacy. We want a civilian president.” She added that her main priority was getting justice for all of the protesters killed since Jan. 25, 2011.

Other bloggers who were in Tahrir Square for the uprising that drove the former air force commander, Hosni Mubarak, from office, registered their dissent, and journalists noted with amazement the scenes of pro-military fervor on the streets of Cairo on Friday.

At #tahrir entrance: banner: people source of authority delegate armed forces 2cleanse terror spots #egypt //t.co/jvRqWztLOi — Sarah El Deeb (@seldeeb) 26 Jul 13

I supported Tammarod when it was a grassroots youth mvmnt seeking peaceful change,I don’t support it as a cheerleader for the army #egypt — Adel Abdel Ghafar (@dooolism) 25 Jul 13

For the first time I can remember, a day of protests I refuse to join. — Abdel-Rahman Hussein (@ElFoulio) 26 Jul 13

I’m not worried. It’s quite clear what is happening, albeit slowly. I’m very despondent. Anything earned in past 2 1/2 yrs is being erased. — Hafsa Halawa (@HafsaHalawa) 26 Jul 13

Protester kisses heavily armed policeman on #Tahrir as people chant “the army, the police and the people are 1 hand” //t.co/yHukDaglP3 — Bel Trew – بل ترو (@Beltrew) 26 Jul 13

The poster many egyptians r carrying today.It says ” I delegate the army and police to fight against terrorism” //t.co/HOKfYk5Rq6 — Hoda Abdel-Hamid (@HodaAH) 26 Jul 13

Others drew attention to the paradoxical fact that the American-financed Egyptian military seemed to be drumming up support by casting itself as a bulwark of defense against the United States. Some posters drew on the widely embraced conspiracy theory that the Muslim Brotherhood was secretly supported by the Obama administration.

Posters on sale of Egypt military’s reign. Sisi, Sadat and Abdel Nasser…and Obama in a diaper //t.co/UUZ6Kyh3kX — Sharif Kouddous (@sharifkouddous) 26 Jul 13

The media even reported a rumor that an imminent American invasion had been prevented only by the might of Egypt’s Air Force.

Some general on Al Hayat claiming that U.S navy is near from Egypt&Egyptian air forces threatened to strike any ship comes to our borders — Zeinobia (@Zeinobia) 26 Jul 13

The Armed Forces would like to take this moment to tell you there are not US warships off the coast of Egypt https://t.co/IMcaTvmtJt — Basil الضبع (@basildabh) 26 Jul 13

As the political commentator Bassem Sabry noted, some well-printed banners displayed on Friday even referred to the United States government’s decision this week to hold back delivery of new fighter jets to Egypt after the defense minister called for a popular mandate to “fight terrorism.”

Egyptians send a message to Obama and the F16 shipment delay RT “@ShadySamir1982: //t.co/vPdEeKCcjD” — Bassem Sabry باسم (@Bassem_Sabry) 26 Jul 13

On Friday morning, outside the main train station in the city of Alexandria — where there were violent clashes between supporters and opponents of the deposed president later in the day — supporters of the military underscored their hatred of the United States by hanging a huge poster of Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, alongside one of General Sisi. The words above Mr. Putin’s image read: “Bye, Bye, America.”

And “Bye bye America” MT @moftasa: Photo of Vladimir Putin in Alexandria next to Sisi & Nasser RT @justicentric: //t.co/pKtwvTfFTq — Bassem Sabry باسم (@Bassem_Sabry) 26 Jul 13

Reporting was contributed by Liam Stack.