Four people were killed at pro-Mohamed Morsi protests across Egypt on Friday.

One person was killed in downtown Alexandria during clashes between Morsi supporters and local residents, a senior police official told Al-Ahram's Arabic news website.

Head of investigative police in the coastal city, General Nasser El-Abd, said the death occurred "when Brotherhood protesters fired at local residents," and another person had received gunshot injuries.

At least 30 were arrested, he added.

Three others were killed in Suez, according to medical sources, after clashes broke out in El-Sabah city, where security forces fired teargas at a pro-Morsi march. Protesters responded by firing birdshot and fireworks, according to state news agency MENA.

Eight people suffered gunshot wounds, medical sources said.

Clashes had occurred earlier on Friday in other governorates. In Giza, security forces fired teargas at pro-Morsi protesters in Khatem Al-Morsaleem Street in the El-Omraneya district.

Nearby El-Soueify Street also witnesses clashes between police and protesters who started marching following Friday prayers.

According to MENA, there was a heavy security presence in Giza in anticipation of protests called for by the Muslim Brotherhood-led National Alliance to Support Legitimacy.

Attempts to disperse pro-Morsi demos also took place in Cairo's Nasr City and Shubra districts.

Elsewhere in Cairo, hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood supporters clashed with opponents in the Cairo districts of Matariya and Mostarad, after Morsi loyalists tore down posters calling for a Yes vote in the constitution referendum. The interior ministry said two policemen were injured the clashes, including one by birdshot.

Morsi supporters have been holding almost daily protests since his ouster in July. But the numbers of protesters have drastically decreased amid a major security crackdown on members, leaders and sympathisers of the Islamist group.

Egyptian authorities declared the Brotherhood a terrorist organisation in December, accusing the group of links with recent attacks on state institutions and on churches since Morsi's ouster.

Ministry of Interior officials have warned that anyone taking part in pro-Brotherhood protests after its designation as a terrorist organisation will be punished with five years in jail, while protest leaders might face the death penalty.

The Brotherhood-led National Alliance to Support Legitimacy has vowed to step up their protests ahead of the constitution referendum on 14 and 15 January, which will mark a turning point in the transitional roadmap set forth by the interim authorities after the removal of the Islamist president. The Islamist group has said they will boycott the poll.

Short link:

