This image made from video shows Dylann Roof, 21, during a court appearance Friday in a Charleston court. (Photo: Screengrab from WLXT-TV in Columbia, S.C.)

The father and uncle of accused Charleston church shooter Dylann Roof identified him from surveillance photos distributed to the media and contacted police, a warrant for Roof's arrest says.

Video surveillance from the church allegedly shows Roof's Hyundai Elantra pulling into the parking lot of the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church on Calhoun Street at 8:06 p.m. The video allegedly shows Roof, 21, wearing a fanny pack, exiting the car and walking through the side entrance of the church, according to an affidavit made public Friday after Roof appeared via video conference in a Charleston magistrate's court.

Roof, who is charged with nine counts of murder and one count of using a deadly weapon in a violent crime, is being heldwithout bail on the murder charges and $1 million bail on the weapons charge in the Charleston County jail.

"He met with parishioners" who were engaged in Bible study, the affidavit, signed by Charleston Police Det. Richard Burckhardt said. "After approximate an hour of studying, (Roof) stood up and with malice aforethought pulled out a handgun and began shooting at the parishioners inside the hall."

He allegedly stood over one parishioner and "uttered a racially inflammatory statement," the affidavit said.

Police recovered .45-caliber shell casings from the crime scene, the affidavit said.

Roof's father told police his son owns a .45-caliber handgun.

Video surveillance shows the shooter, described as a white male wearing a gray, long-sleeved shirt, emerging from the church carrying a handgun, looking both ways, and then getting back into the Hyundai Elantra.

South Carolina motor vehicle records show Roof owns a black 2000 Hyundai Elantra, the affidavit said.

Roof is escorted from the Shelby, N.C., Police Department on June 18. (Photo: Chuck Burton, AP)

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1LkrhGw