The president of a far-Right organisation, which Charleston gunman Dylann Roof credited with inspiring his church shooting , has given donations to a number of Republican presidential candidates.

Ted Cruz, Rand Paul and Rick Santorum were all given money by Earl Holt, a Texas-based activist. Mr Holt has given $65,000 (£41,000) to Republican campaign funds in recent years, while comments that black people were "the laziest, stupidest and most criminally-inclined race in the history of the world" were posted online in his name.

His organisation, the Council of Conservative Citizens, claims on its website to be "the only serious nationwide activist group that sticks up for white rights".

Since 2012, Mr Holt has contributed $8,500 to Mr Cruz, the Texas senator running for president, according to research by The Guardian . Mr Cruz's spokesman said on Sunday that the money would be returned.

Rick Santorum, who attended Sunday's memorial service in Charleston, received $1,500 from Mr Holt. Mr Santorum's spokesman Matthew Beynon said: "Senator Santorum does not condone or respect racist or hateful comments of any kind. Period. The views the senator campaigns on are his own and he is focused on uniting America, not dividing her."

Mr Holt also gave $1,750 to Rand Paul's election fund, and he gave $2,000 to the 2012 presidential campaign of Mitt Romney.

Roof, 21, who is charged with nine counts of murder, is believed to have written an online manifesto in which he said that the Council of Conservative Citizens had inspired him.

"The first website I came to was the Council of Conservative Citizens. There were pages upon pages of these brutal black on White murders. I was in disbelief. At this moment I realized that something was very wrong. How could the news be blowing up the Trayvon Martin case while hundreds of these black on White murders got ignored?"

Mr Holt said on Sunday that it was was "not surprising" that Roof was apparently informed by the group’s website as it reported race relations "accurately and honestly".

However, he added: “The CofCC is hardly responsible for the actions of this deranged individual merely because he gleaned accurate information from our website.”