In the trial’s guilt phase, prosecutors used witnesses, photographs and autopsy reports to prove the gruesome aftermath of the Wednesday night when Mr. Roof pulled a semiautomatic handgun and opened fire at the end of a Bible study session in the church’s fellowship hall.

Prosecutors also relied on Mr. Roof’s own words, documented in a handwritten journal, an online manifesto and a video recording of his confession to the F.B.I., to portray him as a violent white supremacist who plotted and carried out the assault in part because, he said, “we have no skinheads, no real K.K.K., no one doing anything but talking on the internet.”

Justice Department officials are expected to return to much of the same evidence, as well as new witnesses, when they argue this week that Mr. Roof should be put to death. In the court filing last year, officials cited nine aggravating factors that they said justified a death sentence, including Mr. Roof’s “substantial planning and premeditation” and his “hatred and contempt toward African-Americans.”

Mr. Roof has said little about how, or even whether, he will urge the jurors to spare his life, but he has said he will not offer a mental health defense of the kind that his lawyers wanted to present. Mr. Roof’s lawyers, including the noted death penalty litigator David I. Bruck, will serve as standby counsel, meaning that they may advise Mr. Roof but cannot address the jurors or call or cross-examine witnesses.

During his closing argument in the trial’s guilt phase, Mr. Bruck, knowing he was unlikely to speak to the jury again, included words, such as “delusional” and “abnormal,” that could fuel doubts about Mr. Roof’s mental condition and move a juror to oppose a death sentence. (In the federal system, a death sentence requires unanimity.)

Last week, before Mr. Roof had another psychiatric examination, the sidelined lawyers said his strategy raised “the question of whether the defendant is actually unable to defend himself.” The lawyers have declined to comment during the trial.

Federal law spells out the competency standard on which Judge Gergel relied on Monday. Under the law, the judge had to determine whether Mr. Roof was “suffering from a mental disease or defect” that made him “unable to understand the nature and consequences of the proceedings against him or to assist properly in his defense.”

If Mr. Roof is sentenced to death, the dispute about his mental health is likely to be central to any appeals.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But he will first face the jury, and on Monday, Judge Gergel limited where, exactly, Mr. Roof may stand as he presents his case in Courtroom No. 6. In an order that outlined seating and positioning for opening statements, closing arguments and testimony, the judge included a mandate: “Defendant will not attempt to approach the jury, the witness stand or the bench.”