Speaking at the service for Ms. Coleman-Singleton, at Mount Moriah Missionary Baptist Church, Mr. Sharpton noted the contradiction of watching Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch, a black woman, formally sworn in on the morning of June 17, and then hearing that evening of the church massacre that he called “racial terrorism.”

Photo

“That morning I saw how far America had come,” he said. “At night, I saw how far we yet have to go.”

The victims, all of them black, were shot to death during Bible study at Emanuel, a church so central to black Charleston’s history that it is known as “Mother Emanuel.”

The man charged with the killings, Dylann Roof, 21, has been linked to white supremacist views, and officials have said the crime was racially motivated.

Yet in the face of profound loss, the funerals Thursday were jubilant, the overflow crowds swaying, singing and cheering, doing the syncopated “Lowcountry clap.” Speakers recalled both women as pillars of their families and their church.

The victims’ family members have drawn national attention for the grace they have shown, offering blessings, love, and even forgiveness to the man accused in the killings — an example they say was set by the people who were suddenly ripped from their lives.

One by one, Ms. Lance’s five grandchildren stood in front of the congregation at Royal Missionary Baptist Church, where her body lay before the altar in a shimmering silver gown, and praised her spirit of generosity, which they hoped would be embraced by all. One of her granddaughters said the family wished her legacy to stretch beyond the bullets and bloodshed at Emanuel.

Photo

“I want my grandmother’s legacy to be a catalyst for this country to change,” she said.

Another granddaughter recalled the grits, bacon and sausage Ms. Lance cooked for her, and the love and care her grandmother showered on her after her own mother died. “My granny was the other side of my heart,” she said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Lance worked for decades as a custodian at Gaillard Auditorium before retiring, and spent 30 years working at Emanuel. She did not finish high school, but she made sure her children and grandchildren went to college.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Sister Lance, we are here,” the Rev. Norvel Goff, interim leader of Emanuel, told the congregation at Royal Missionary. “Mother Emanuel, we are here.”

At Emanuel, Ms. Lance was the sexton, in charge of keeping her church clean seven days a week, “and if God had given her eight, she would have been there eight days,” Rev. Goff said.

She was “not a halfway person,” not even in her “usher strut,” he said. “When Sister Ethel Lance praised the Lord, you had to strap on your spiritual seatbelt.”

In a final farewell, he said, “Sleep on, Sister Lance. We’ll see you in the morning.”

Ms. Coleman-Singleton was a high school track coach and speech therapist, and also a minister at Emanuel. She had a penchant for bestowing nicknames, said Joe Hauff, a fellow coach who worked with her at Goose Creek High School, calling him “sugar love.”

Video

To their students, “she never had a harsh word,” he said. “She left that to me.”

The Rev. Steven Singleton, former pastor of Emanuel, eulogized her as enthusiastic about her faith and her three children. When he attended one of the football games of her son, Caleb, he recalled, she was the loudest person in the stands, and “Sharonda never sat down.”

Mr. Sharpton put the church massacre into the context of a long history of racism-fueled violence, including a reference to both Ms. Coleman-Singleton and the 1963 bombing of a Birmingham church that killed four black girls. “There’s four little girls in Birmingham that need a coach,” he said, a remark that drew the cheering, applauding congregation to its feet.

Ms. Coleman-Singleton’s body lay clad in the letters and pink and green colors of her sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha, the oldest Greek-letter organization founded by college-educated black women. The sorority’s crest adorned the satin lining of her coffin, and 200 sorority sisters formed a ring around the perimeter of the sanctuary floor during a ceremony before the service. Reverberations from the killings continued, spread around the state and the nation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Washington, the Very Rev. Gary Hall, dean of the Washington National Cathedral, called for the removal of stained glass windows installed there in 1953, honoring the lives and legacies of the Confederate generals Stonewall Jackson and Robert E. Lee and displaying the image of the Confederate battle flag. The cathedral’s governing board must decide whether to act on his recommendation. And leaders of the South Carolina legislature said members of both houses would return in two weeks to consider business that would include removal of the Confederate battle flag from the State House grounds.

Politics intruded momentarily on the service as well, when Mr. Sharpton said he had never met Governor Haley, but had led a protest outside the State House and had seen her looking down from her window.

When her turn came to speak, Ms. Haley said, “If you were protesting outside my window, if you would have come inside and held out your hand, I would have hugged you.”

“I’ll be back,” Mr. Sharpton yelled out, to laughter from the pews.

Funeral services will be held Saturday at Emanuel for Tywanza Sanders, 26; his aunt, Susie Jackson, 87; and Cynthia Hurd, 54, a librarian and longtime church member. Witnesses said Mr. Sanders tried to talk the gunman into surrendering, and then tried in vain to shield his aunt.

Other funerals will be next week. Services for DePayne Middleton-Doctor, 49, will be on Sunday and for Myra Thompson, 59, on Monday. There will be a service in Charleston on Tuesday for the Rev. Daniel Lee Simmons Sr., 74, a traveling preacher, and another in Columbia later in the week.