Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

This is the first picture of a white gunman suspected of killing nine people at a historic African-American church in the US.

The suspect, who police described as a 21-year-old white man, can be seen wearing a sweatshirt, jeans and boots.

Police have now released this image as they desperately search for the gunman who is still at large hours after the shooting last night.

Eight victims were found dead in the church, Chief Gregory Mullen told reporters at a media conference, and a ninth person died after being taken to a hospital.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

One other person was wounded and receiving treatment following the shocking incident in Charleston, South Carolina.

Mullen said: "It is unfathomable that somebody in today's society would walk into a church when people are having a prayer meeting and take their lives."

But the Reverend Al Sharpton, the New York-based civil rights leader, said in a Tweet that the Reverend Clementa Pinckney, the church's pastor and a member of the state Senate, was among the fatalities.

(Image: EPA)

Mr Pinckney was a 41-year-old state senator, married and a father of two.

The shooting occurred at the Emanuel AME Church in the historic centre of downtown Charleston around 9pm local time (1am GMT), according to Charleston Police Department spokesman Charles Francis.

After the shooting, a bomb threat was reported near the church, Charleston County Sheriff's Office spokesman Eric Watson said, and people who were gathered in the area were told by police to move back.

(Image: EPA)

Chief Mullen told the press conference that the all-clear had been given after checks following the bomb threat.

A police chaplain was present at the scene of the shooting, and a helicopter with a searchlight hovered overhead as officers combed through the area.

"We pray for the families, they've got a long road ahead of them," Reverend James Johnson, a local civil rights activist, said during the impromptu prayer service.

(Image: Reuters)

Police took a man with a backpack and a camera into custody, but later said they were still searching for a suspect in the shooting.

Following the attack on the church, Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, canceled an appearance in Charleston that had been scheduled for Thursday morning.

"Governor Bush's thoughts and prayers are with the individuals and families affected by this tragedy," his campaign team said in a statement.

(Image: Google Street view)

Local broadcaster WCSC reported the FBI was on the scene but they could not be reached immediately for comment.

The website for the church said it has one of the largest and oldest black congregations in the south. It has its roots in the early 19th century, and the current building was built in 1891.

It is considered a historically significant building, according to the National Park Service.

Charleston church shooting: Latest updates on killings as gunman opens fire