A South Carolina judge — who once uttered the N-word in the courtroom — opened the Friday hearing for racist mass murderer Dylann Roof with a tone-deaf statement urging the community to rally around the killer’s family.

“We have victims — nine of them. But we also have victims on the other side,” Charleston County Magistrate James “Skip” Gosnell, Jr. announced in the courtroom packed with the victims’ anguished relatives.

NRA OFFICIAL BLAMES PASTOR FOR CHARLESTON CHURCH SHOOTING

'We have victims — nine of them. But we also have victims on the other side,' said Charleston County Magistrate James (Skip) Gosnell Jr. as he opened the hearing. (Joe Marino/New York Daily News) Dylann Roof appears via video before a judge in Charleston, S.C, on Friday. (AP)

“There are victims on this young man’s side of the family.”

Gosnell was just getting started.

“Nobody would have ever thrown them into the whirlwind of events that they are being thrown into,” he said.

“We must find it in our heart at some point in time not only to help those that are victims but to also help his family as well.”

AMERICA FILLED WITH HATE AND GUNS 53 YEARS AFTER MLK SPEECH

A woman weeps Friday outside the historic Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, where nine people were murdered Wednesday. (Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images) Police tape surrounds the parking lot behind the AME Emanuel Church as FBI forensic experts work the crime scene Friday. (Stephen B. Morton/AP)

Gosnell, who was branded a racist sympathizer on social media, has a history of putting his foot in his mouth.

“There are four kinds of people in this world: black people, white people, red necks, and n-----s,” he told a black defendant in a Nov. 2013 bond reduction hearing.

Gosnell later offered a sorry defense, saying he was merely repeating a statement he heard from an African American lawman.

Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church re-opens for services

“[Gosnell] represents he knew the defendant, the defendant’s father, and the defendant’s grandfather,” court papers show.

[Gosnell] represents that when the defendant, an African-American, appeared in court for the bond hearing, \[Gosnell\] recalled a statement made to him by a veteran African American sheriff’s deputy.”

Gosnell insisted he made the comment in an “ill-considered effort to encourage him to recognize and change the path he had chosen in life.”

GUEST COLUMNS: BLACK LIVES MATTER TOO LITTLE IN AMERICA

Still, the outrageous statement led the state Supreme Court to issue Gosnell a “public reprimand.”

Gosnell’s Friday statement — which was aired live on cable news — drew the wrath of hordes of furious social media users. “Judge James Gosnell in the complete wrong to give sympathy first to #DylannRoof's family. But it's South Carolina,” tweeted Vincent Obisie.

“Wait was judge James Gosnell Jr job to arraign Dylan Roof or defend Roof's family? Wow #RacismInAmerica,” Pierrela Jeanbaptist posted.

CHARLESTON SHOOTING SURVIVOR PLAYED DEAD

“OH.OH.OH. Judge James Gosnell SYMPATHIZING with #DylannRoof family as victims?! Ashamed to be white today,” tweeted Lisa Sanders.

Gosnell offered no apologies afterward. "I set the tone of my court,” he told FOX News. “It's my courtroom, I take control over it, and I conduct business within the scope of the law."

Gosnell also raised eyebrows in 2003 when he showed up at a county lockup about 1 a.m. after a fellow jurist was busted on a DUI charge — and signed a jail form setting bond at $1,002.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE VIDEO HERE.WATCH THE SECOND VIDEO HERE.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!