Story highlights The attack at the historic Charleston, South Carolina, church is being investigated as a hate crime targeting African-Americans

Peter Bergen says such instances of extremist terrorism have been more prevalent in the U.S. than jihadist activity since 9/11

Peter Bergen is CNN's national security analyst, a vice president at New America and a professor of practice at Arizona State University. He is the author of "Manhunt: The Ten-Year Search for bin Laden -- From 9/11 to Abbottabad." David Sterman is a program associate at New America.

(CNN) The horrific attack at a historic church in Charleston, South Carolina, was allegedly carried out by a young white man who appeared to have deliberately targeted the church simply because it was serving African-Americans. Witnesses say the suspect said he was there "to shoot black people," a law enforcement official said. By any reasonable standard, this is terrorism, which is generally defined as an act of violence against civilians by individuals or organizations for political purposes.

But do the thought experiment: If this attack on the church in Charleston had been conducted by a Muslim man shouting "Allahu akbar," what is already a big news story would have become even bigger, as it would appear to fit so well into the political and media narrative that Muslim militants are the major terrorist problem in the United States.

That's a false narrative, as it turns out. In fact, deadly acts of terrorism by virulent racists and anti-government extremists have been more common in the United States than deadly acts of jihadist terrorism since 9/11

There is something particularly shocking in a multiracial, multiethnic, multireligious society about murdering people simply because of who they are. That's true whether it's African-Americans in Charleston attending a Bible study group or spectators at the Boston Marathon . These attacks are acts designed to terrorize, and we should call them such.

According to a count by New America , since 9/11, 26 people have been killed in jihadist terrorist attacks in the United States, while extremist right-wing racists and anti-government militants have killed 48, if we include the nine people who were killed in the attack in Charleston, which is being investigated as a hate crime.

JUST WATCHED Why we should call Charleston attack 'terrorism' Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Why we should call Charleston attack 'terrorism' 02:39