Bond was set on Friday at $1 million on a single weapons charge for a Columbia area man arrested for shooting and killing nine people in a downtown Charleston church.

Dylann Roof is accused of shooting and killing nine people in a downtown Charleston church on Wednesday night and has been charged with nine counts of murder and possession of a weapon during a violent crime. Bond could not be set during Roof's hearing on Friday for the nine counts of murder.

Law enforcement took the 21-year-old into into custody in Shelby, NC during a traffic stop. Shelby, which is west of Charlotte, is approximately 245 miles from the shooting scene.



According to a police source in Charlotte, Roof made a stop in Charlotte before he was caught saying he "was here in Charlotte at one point because they got him using his credit card,"



Another source says police received information Roof was traveling along Highway 74. Police sources say law enforcement tracked Roof after he allegedly ditched his cellphone and was using someone else's phone.



According to Shelby Police, officials got a call just after 10:30 a.m. from Kings Mountain Police saying a business believed they had seen Roof's car. Shelby Police spotted him around ten minutes later driving west along East Dixon Boulevard, in Shelby.



He was pulled over, identified and arrested at 10:49 a.m. He was cooperative during the arrest.



Click/tap here to see more pictures of Roof and images from the Shelby. NC arrest scene



Law enforcement officials flew Roof back to the Lowcountry Thursday evening.



Prior to the discovery of Roof, an active manhunt was taking place in several locations in the Midlands and across the state.



Public records show Roof was most recently arrested in February on drug charges. According to a spokesman for the Lexington County Sheriff's Department, he was booked in the detention center on February 28 and again on April 26 after being arrested by the Columbia Police Department.



According to Lexington School District One, Roof attended White Knoll High School for at least part of his 9th grade year. He also spent time at Carolina Spring Middle School and White Knoll Elementary.



He also spent several others inside Richland School District One. "According to information provided by the Office of Research, Power School records indicate that Dylann attended Rosewood in the fifth grade, Hand in the 6th and 7th grades and Dreher from March 1 – May 29, 2010," district spokeswoman Edith Caudle said.



Roof's last known address is a home on Garners Ferry Road in Eastover.



When WIS attempted to speak with Roof's father at a Columbia house, he refused. According to a law enforcement official, SLED had been at that home for several hours on Thursday.



The shooting, which law enforcement has classified as a hate crime, took place at Emanuel AME Church on Calhoun Street in downtown Charleston around 9:00 p.m.



Charleston Police Chief Greg Mullen said officers arrived to find eight people dead inside the church. A ninth victim was later pronounced dead at a local hospital.



Click/tap here to see images from the shooting scene



The shooting occurred during a prayer meeting at the church.



The shooter stayed at the church for about an hour before shooting six women and three men, including the church's pastor state Sen. Clementa Pinckney.



Early Thursday morning, authorities released several surveillance images of Roof and his vehicle.

Copyright 2015 WIS. All rights reserved. WBTV contributed to this report.