The identities of the nine victims in the shooting that took place at the Emanuel AME Church in Charleston on Wednesday night were confirmed by the Charleston County Coroner Rae Wooten Thursday afternoon.

The identities of the nine victims in the shooting that took place at the Emanuel AME Church in Charleston on Wednesday night were confirmed by the Charleston County Coroner Rae Wooten Thursday afternoon.

Columbia Police Department arrest reports outline two separate incidents in which Dylann Storm Roof, the suspect in Wednesday's church massacre in Charleston, was arrested at Columbiana Centre.

Mall security contacted a police officer patrolling the mall on February 28, 2015 about a man wearing all black who was asking store employees "out of the ordinary" questions.

Workers at "The Shoe Dept." and "Bath and Body Works" told security that Roof was asking them how many associates were working, what time they closed and what time they leave.

The officer approached Roof and asked him why he was questioning store employees.

According to the report, Roof told the officer "his parents were pressuring him to get a job." The officer asked Roof is he had gotten any applications from the stores and he said he had not.

Roof, according to the officer, appeared nervous during their conversation. When asked whether or not he had anything illegal in his possession, Roof said "no."

The officer then searched Roof and found an unlabeled white bottle containing orange strips, which Roof identified as Listerine Strips. The officer, however, did not believe him and asked again. Roof said the strips were actually Suboxone, a schedule III narcotic for which the 20-year-old did not have a prescription.

According to the FDA, Suboxone contains the active ingredient, buprenorphine hydrochloride, which works to reduce the symptoms of opiate dependence.

The officer arrested Roof and had his 2000 Hyundai Elantra towed. The Elantra is the same vehicle Roof allegedly drove to Emanuel AME Church in Charleston on Wednesday before shooting nine people. He was later arrested in that same vehicle in Shelby, NC.

Roof was arrested two months later at Columbiana Centre for violating a one-year ban from the mall. At that time, mall management added two more years to Roof's ban. Police charged him with trespassing and booked him into the Lexington Detention Center.

Copyright 2015 WIS. All rights reserved.