The removal of the Confederate battle flag from the grounds of the South Carolina Statehouse was accompanied Friday by cheer and jeers — and just a few tears.

"Take it down! Take it down!" the crowd of some 10,000 chanted as an honor guard from the South Carolina Highway Patrol in gray uniforms marched toward the flag pole.

Then, as the flag was lowered, they broke into “Hey, hey, hey, goodbye” and “USA! USA!”

Gov. Nikki Haley watched the flag being furled from the Statehouse steps, where she stood with relatives of the nine black worshipers who were massacred in a Charleston church by a white racist.

Denise Quarles, whose mother, Myra Thompson, was one of the murder victims, said she and the others are “smiling from heaven.”

A man dressed as a Confederate soldier arrives and salutes the rebel flag at the South Carolina Statehouse early Friday. (Sam Tyson/ABCNews4.com)

“The tragedy was a tragedy,” said Quarles. “But now of the other side of that tragedy, we see a lot of positives coming out. Maybe people will change their hearts.”

Haley, a Republican who once defended the flag but had a change of heart after the murders, did not speak during the ceremony. But at one point she nodded and smiled in the direction of somebody who shouted, “Thank you governor.”

A woman waves a sign as she waits for the Confederate battle flag to be removed. (John Bazemore/AP) John Blankenship watches the sun rise beyond the Confederate battle flag at the South Carolina statehouse Friday. (Sean Rayford/Getty Images) People demonstrate as the Confederate 'Stars and Bars' flies in front of the South Carolina statehouse Thursday, its final evening. (John Moore/Getty Images) A South Carolina highway patrolman stands guard as the Confederate flag flies in front of the South Carolina statehouse Thursday. (John Moore/Getty Images) Confederate flag supporters stand outside the South Carolina Statehouse Thursday. (John Moore/Getty Images) People pose for photos as the Confederate flag flies in front of the South Carolina Statehouse Thursday. (John Moore/Getty Images) A family visits as the Confederate flag flies in front of the South Carolina Statehouse Thursday. (John Moore/Getty Images) Reverend David Kennedy, of the New Beginnings Missionary Baptist Church of Laurens, S.C., cheers after South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley signed legislation permanently removing the Confederate battle flag from the state Capitol grounds. (JASON MICZEK/REUTERS)

“I want people to remember what today feels like and to know that anything is possible,” Haley said earlier in an appearance on “Today."

The honor guard removing the flag was the same one that carried the coffin of state Sen. Clementa Pinckney, one of the victims of the Emanuel African Methodist Church slaughter, into the Statehouse for a viewing after the June 17 murders.

Man says he finished this painting about four days after #emanuelame shooting pic.twitter.com/w3qzfFGEWz — Sam Tyson (@SamInteractive) July 10, 2015

After the flag came down, President Obama weighed in on Twitter.

"South Carolina taking down the confederate flag — a signal of good will and healing, and a meaningful step towards a better future," he wrote.

South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley signed a bill to remove the Confederate battle flag from the Statehouse grounds Thursday. (Sean Rayford/Getty Images) Haley appeared on the 'Today' show Friday just before the flag's removal (today )

“Courage in South Carolina – a divisive symbol comes down. The healing continues. God bless the Mother Emanuel victims and their families,” Vice President Biden tweeted.

Crystal Hampton arrived at the Statehouse in Columbia, S.C., seven hours ahead of the 10 a.m. ceremony.

“I’m here to witness history,” she said after a special armored van took the flag to the Confederate relic room at the state’s Military History Museum. “This is monumental. We have people all over the nation watching. We have people all over the nation who are coming to join us here to see this being placed in the museum — where it should be.”

While the crowd watching was overwhelming made up of people like Hampton who consider the stars and bars a symbol of slavery and white supremacy, there were a handful — including several in vintage Confederate uniforms — who hewed to the line that the banner was a symbol of Southern heritage.

HK Edgerton supports the flag and says it's not a sign of hate pic.twitter.com/zhXFHdKmg4 — Sam Tyson (@SamInteractive) July 10, 2015

“This is a sad day,” said Charles Jones of Greenville, S.C., who draped a Confederate flag over his shoulders.

South Carolina began flying the flag over the dome of the Capitol in Columbia in 1961 to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Civil War.

Crowd cheers as Confederate flag is removed from the South Carolina Statehouse

But instead of removing it, the white politicians in charge of the state kept flying it as the struggle to end discrimination against blacks was going on.

It was removed from the dome and moved to its current site in 2000 as part of a compromise reached with Democratic black lawmakers.

The drive to get rid of the flag completely took off after Dylann Roof gunned down the worshipers during a prayer service and photos emerged of him holding Confederate flags.

Reversing course, Haley said it was time to get rid of the flag and she was backed by the conservative state’s two Republican senators, one of whom is African-American.

After several days of the debate, the GOP-dominated South Carolina legislature voted overwhelmingly in favor of a bill to ban the flag from state property.

Haley signed the legislation on Thursday with nine pens — one for each of the victims.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? WATCH THE FIRST VIDEO HERE AND THE SECOND VIDEO HERE.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!

With News Wire Services