A spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense, Gen. Dawlat Waziri, responding to the cabinet report, confirmed on Monday that 4,551 Afghan soldiers had been killed through March 20, 2013. But he said the ministry did not have figures for the current Afghan year, which ends March 20, 2014.

The cabinet figures included most of this year as well, according to a cabinet official, but did not distinguish between soldiers and police officers.

While there was as yet no complete breakdown year by year, there is little doubt that most of the increase in Afghan casualties occurred during the past three years.

Before 2010, both police and military casualties were relatively few, reflecting the small size of the Afghan security forces, and the higher proportion of the fighting carried out by NATO and American troops. For instance, in 2009, roughly twice as many coalition soldiers were killed as Afghan soldiers, based on data compiled by the Brookings Institution and icasualties.org, a website that collects data on war casualties.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

According to the compilations by Brookings, only 1,236 Afghan soldiers and 3,290 Afghan police officers were killed from 2007 to 2010. That would mean, based on the cabinet’s latest numbers, that from 2011 to the present, more than 8,000 soldiers and police officers have been killed in the conflict.

According to the figures provided by General Waziri, of the 4,451 Afghan soldiers killed in the war, 2,771, or over 60 percent of the total, were killed in the three years that ended March 20, 2013.

Last September, the commander of the International Security Assistance Force, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., said in an interview with The Guardian that more than 100 Afghan security force members a week were then being killed. “I’m not assuming that those casualties are sustainable,” he told the newspaper.

At the time, Afghan officials disputed the general’s statistics, saying they must have included those wounded as well as killed. As recently as last month, after 21 Afghan soldiers were killed in a single Taliban attack, the spokesman for the Ministry of Defense, Gen. Zaher Azimi, refused to comment on reports of a rising death toll. “We have decided we will not share the number of casualties with the media,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Afghan death toll is four times higher than that of the international coalition, which has lost 3,425 soldiers — 2,313 of them Americans — during the 13-year conflict.

The statement from the Council of Ministers also detailed payments of 1.3 billion afghanis, or about $23 million, in death benefits to soldiers’ families. It also said that 12,336 civilians had been killed in the conflict, and that 11,607 civilians had been wounded; those figures are in line with data compiled by the United Nations. The Afghan government, the statement said, had also paid 1.7 billion afghanis in death benefits to the families of civilian victims.

It was unclear why the cabinet had released the data now, but Mr. Karzai has been concerned by the strong public reaction to the deaths of the 21 Afghan soldiers last month, in what Afghan officials called the single deadliest attack on the army during the conflict. The data may have been intended to show how much the government had spent compensating victims of the conflict.

“The killing of our 21 A.N.A. heroes was on the top of the agenda of cabinet and National Security Council meetings chaired by the president,” Mr. Karzai’s spokesman, Aimal Faizi, said, referring to the Afghan National Army. “He remained behind the scenes in order to not politicize the issue but was deeply saddened. The president since then has been focused on the bigger picture of the incident. How and why it happened.”