Afghan bus blast kills 10 Explosion occurs as coalition troops embark on major sweep Canadian soldiers take positions Wednesday during sweeps in Panjawi, Afghanistan. SPECIAL REPORT • Timeline: Chasing al Qaeda • Timeline: Al Qaeda attacks • Timeline: Bin Laden's messages Special Report YOUR E-MAIL ALERTS Taliban Afghanistan North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) or or Create Your Own KABUL, Afghanistan (CNN) -- A minibus carrying workers to an American base blew up in the southern Afghan city of Kandahar on Thursday, killing 10 people and wounding 15 others in an incident thought to be caused by the detonation of explosives planted on the vehicle. The blast happened during two key developments in Afghanistan-- an upsurge in attacks throughout Afghanistan by Taliban fighters, and the recent start of a major combat operation aimed at a resurgent rebel force. Called Operation Mountain Thrust, more than 10,000 U.S., Afghan and coalition forces have fanned out across Kandahar and neighboring Oruzgan, Helmand, and Zabul provinces to conduct sweep operations against safe havens. (Watch as troops hunt Taliban rebels -- 2:41) Working with Afghan forces they expect to spend several days rooting out Taliban safe havens. The coalition forces include Canadian and British troops. Sher Shah, a Kandahar police official, said Thursday's accident -- which took place at 7:40 a.m. -- occurred after a Toyota Coaster mini-bus blew up after a collision between the bus and a car. "The Coaster was carrying some laborers and also some translators to the American base in Kandahar," he said. "We think that the explosives were hidden in the bus and perhaps they were originally supposed to blow up later when the vehicle reached the base. The bus is much more damaged than the car. Some of those injured were passers by." Kandahar's main hospital has received seven dead bodies and treated 17 injured people, a doctor there told CNN. A spokesman for the Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, according to the Reuters news agency. "It is our success. It shows that we have access to even highly-guarded government places and we can do whatever we want," Mullah Hayat Khan, told Reuters. Coalition officials says have said the level of violence in Afghanistan's southern region have been on the rise, coinciding with a transition from U.S.-led to NATO-led operations. "There has been somewhat of an increase in the number of incidents by Taliban and other forces which are opposed to the central Afghan government," said U.S. Brig. Gen. Carter Ham. He was referring to efforts by the Taliban to recruit new members and re-establish its influence in the southern provinces. "So there are pockets, if you will, in some of the districts in those four provinces where there has not been much security force presence," Ham said. "And so when there is now security force presence, there is some conflict there." Ham said the four provinces would ultimately constitute the southern regional command of NATO's International Security Assistance Force. NATO is set to take over the command from U.S. forces soon. Officials say the coalition forces include British, Canadian and Romanian troops. Afghan forces will join them over the next several days as they conduct sweeps on Taliban safe havens. One military official said he expected a showdown as soon as Thursday, according to The Associated Press. "I can't say there will be a major battle on [June] 15, but if there isn't, there will be in the days following that," military spokesman Lt. Col. Paul Fitzpatrick told the AP. The operation would involve more than combat missions, military officials said. "Operations are intended to extend the reach of the Afghan government into areas where there's been little presence before, as well as extending humanitarian and reconstruction efforts," Ham said. "The performance of the 59,000 Afghan security force members continue to improve, and they are taking the lead in many of these operations." Col. Tom Collins, a U.S. military spokesman for the coalition, said part of the operation also will involve building roads and medical facilities. CNN's Tom Coghlan contributed to this report Copyright 2006 CNN. All rights reserved.This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. Associated Press contributed to this report. Home Page Get up-to-the minute news from CNN CNN.com gives you the latest stories and video from the around the world, with in-depth coverage of U.S. news, politics, entertainment, health, crime, tech and more. Home Page Get up-to-the minute news from CNN CNN.com gives you the latest stories and video from the around the world, with in-depth coverage of U.S. news, politics, entertainment, health, crime, tech and more.





ALL AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE DC FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY

