Insurgency is being fuelled by 'massive amounts of money' from supporters outside Afghanistan, says Obama envoy

Barack Obama's special envoy for Afghanistan and Pakistan today announced a new US campaign to try to stem the flow of foreign funds to the Taliban, money believed to be running into hundreds of millions of dollars a year, mainly from the Gulf Arab states.

Richard Holbrooke, the former Balkan peace enforcer appointed by the White House to lead a new US policy on Afghanistan and place greater emphasis on Pakistan, said most of the money fuelling the insurgency came from supporters abroad, including in western Europe, and exceeded the Taliban's earnings from the opium and heroin trade.

The Taliban were the beneficiaries of "massive amounts of money from outside Afghanistan", Holbrooke said.

He declined to put a figure on the external funds, but the opium poppy trade and heroin refining operations are estimated to net the Taliban at least $400m (£244m) every year.

Led by officials at the US treasury and including Pentagon, FBI and CIA personnel, a new "task force on drugs and money" will try to weaken the Islamist insurgents, Holbrooke said.

"The money is coming in from sympathisers from all over the world with the bulk of it appearing to come from the Gulf, not any money we know of coming from governments," Holbrooke said. "Money is probably coming from sympathisers in western Europe as well. This is a huge problem."

In Brussels to discuss the Afghan campaign and the refugee crisis in Pakistan's Swat valley with senior EU and Nato officials, Holbrooke added that the Taliban used drug money locally to fund their operations in the "Pashtun belt", but that the more significant financial support came from abroad.

Holbrooke also complained that the fate of 2 million refugees in Pakistan's Swat valley was not being taken seriously enough in Europe, judging by the money being offered to deal with the crisis.

"This is more than a humanitarian crisis. This is a strategic issue as well. Those refugees are in the exact area where al-Qaida and the Taliban are, and it's right up against the Afghan border," he said.

He had repeatedly demanded of the Europeans that they "step up to the plate" and at least match the $335m the US has made available. The EU contribution so far is around half of that.

"In order to succeed in Afghanistan we have to have some degree of stability and control on the Pakistan side of the border ... Right now, refugee relief assistance in Pakistan is the most urgent issue."

Holbrooke refused to criticise reluctance in Europe to commit more troops to the war in Afghanistan, describing the dispute as "fruitless and unproductive", but said that the Bush administration had bequeathed "kind of no strategy" on Afghanistan to the Obama White House.