President Karzai’s Message







Unofficial Translation



President Karzai Address to the Nation on Afghanistan’s Peace Efforts

In the name of Allah the merciful

Dear countrymen,

The brave and patient nation of Afghanistan, 10 years has passed since the beginning of a new phase for our country, from the fall of Taliban to the establishment of GIRoA. We did have development in education, health services, economy, legislation, infrastructure and country’s rehabilitation. However, we did not reach our goal in bringing peace to our people, which was and is our biggest hope. This year is very important for our country, it is a history making year. On one hand, we have important conferences such as Bonn and Istanbul, on the other hand, we have the security transition, governance, stabilizing the security and development projects. We have to prepare for the departure of ISAF by 2014, so we can be self-sufficient.

This year, we have started to talk with the United States concerning long-term strategic plans. If they accept our conditions and respect our national sovereignty we will sign it with the support of our Loya Jirga.Undoubtedly, peace and security are the only wishes of our nation.

We started the peace process with good intentions. We created the High Peace Council led by martyred Prof. Rabbani. This was supported by the International Community. On the other hand, the enemies of peace and stability of our country, joined with foreign countries’ terror groups and insurgent cells have not stopped the assassinations of our countrymen, religious, political and tribal leaders.In the recent months, the assassination of our national figures has created a lot of anxiety and concerns our people.

Our people and our politicians have questions about the future of our country, and as I know, their concerns are well founded. The assassination of Prof. Rabbani, Daoud Daoud, ANP Chief of Takhar, Governor of Kunduz, Jihadi Commander Malek Zarin, Bamyan Chief of Council, ANP- Chief of Kunduz, ANP-Chief of Kandahar, MP Mohammad Hashem, Advisor of Tribal Affairs, Chairman of Kandahar provincial council, Kandahar Mayor and other sons of this country is not a good omen for Afghan peace prospects.

Peace and stability are necessary for every nation’s existence. War and instability are out of norm, which is why we always try using all of our resources to bring peace.It was our hope and it is our hope to bring peace to our people. However, the Taliban answer is terror and killing. Peace cannot be one-sided. Peace makes sense only to those who believe in it. Hence, the Government of Afghanistan has the responsibility to defend the independence of our country and peace by standing firm against our enemies.Afghanistan tried to have brotherly and friendly relations with Pakistan in the past five years. This included a respectful diplomatic relations. I personally emphasized clearly that Afghanistan and Pakistan are inseparable brothers.

I hope both countries live in the spirit of brotherhood and cooperation. Since the creation of Pakistan, there has never been a clear attempt for mutual understanding. Undoubtedly, our brother country, Pakistan has supported the peace in Afghanistan and we hope the Pakistani government will support the peace process. I have repeated that terrorism will spread to Pakistan too and unfortunately it has. Beside all this destruction, misery and misfortune that has engulfed Pakistan and Afghanistan, terrorism is being used as a weapon. Regretfully, the government of Pakistan did help Afghanistan to bring peace.We hope that Pakistan understands our people’s interest and assist both countries in bringing peace and stability.

Dear countrymen, my bothers and sisters, ten years have passed and we still have our differences with NATO concerning the way we fight terrorism. Several times we tried to bring to the attention of NATO and US the sources and strongholds of the terrorists. Fight against terrorism is not in the villages and houses of the Afghans. The fight against terrorism is in the strongholds, training centers where terrorists are being trained and come from. This would be more effective and meaningful. Lack of attention to the sources of terrorism in the past ten years has cost 1000s of our innocent countrymen’s lives.

My countrymen, this year is very important for Afghans. It is dangerous and full of perils. This is one of the greatest and most ancient countries in the World. It’s time that all elders, politicians, military personnel, scholars, tribal leaders, residents of cities and villages unite and work together to defend our country’s interest, sovereignty, constitution and territory that we have achieved in the past ten years. Albeit, our country has been weakened by 30 years of war and foreign interferences, nevertheless our nation is one of the strongest nations in the world. The national unity and defense of this country has been achieved by spilling the blood of many great people in Afghanistan.

My wish is to show our national unity under the flag of Afghanistan to the enemies of our independence. Dear countrymen, we have to appreciate and respect our Muslims martyrs who died defending this country for the past 30 years. I am certain that the sons of this country will not spare any sacrifice.

I want to emphasize once again;

1) Peace is the holy wish of Afghans and we have to try to achieve this, we have to be clear with who we can make peace, we should review the methodology of the peace process

2) We are involved with the governments and not the forces that depend on them, that is why we should talk to the governments who make the decisions

3) We have no choice but to coordinate strategic relations in order to bring stability and prevent foreign influences in the region

4) In regards to all the above mentioned issues, we seek the assistance and advice of Loya Jirga taking place shortly.

We ask Almighty Allah to save our great nation from the enemies.

Pashtu & Dari