KABUL, Afghanistan — A bomb attack on a patrol killed two NATO soldiers and five Afghan soldiers on Friday evening, in an impoverished area of eastern Afghanistan where the Afghan government has little presence and where there have not previously been many lethal attacks on soldiers.

The explosion, at dusk in a mountainous area of Paktia Province’s eastern Zurmat district, also wounded two Afghan soldiers and a NATO interpreter, according to a NATO spokesman.

Although Paktia is one of three provinces where the Haqqani network, a particularly brutal insurgent group that is now based across the border in Pakistan, is active, local elders said this attack was staged by local Taliban who are angry at the government.

“Most of the Taliban here are from Paktia Province and are fighting the government and foreign forces bravely because the government has done nothing for these people here,” said a local tribal elder, who asked that his name not be used. “Not one of the government officials has shown up to help the Mamozai tribe; neither have they come to the village where this happened, nor come down to our village.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“All our youths are jobless; they have nothing to work, so they have to join the Taliban and fight for them.” he said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The Taliban took responsibility for the attack, said Zabiullah Mujahid, the Taliban spokesman for the east and north of the country.

Although in the past there have been relatively few attacks in Paktia Province, it has recently become more violent, with at least five American deaths there in July, counting the two on Friday, according to icasualties.org and Afghan security officials. The three earlier American deaths also occurred in Zurmat district; three Afghan soldiers died in that attack as well, according to Afghan security officials.