Deadly Taliban onslaught near Australian base

Updated

Australian troops were called in to help evacuate casualties after insurgents launched a coordinated assault on key buildings in the southern Afghan city of Tarin Kowt.

Insurgents armed with automatic weapons and wearing vests strapped with explosives attacked the governor's office and the police chief's building in the city, which is less than 5 kilometres from the main Australian base in Afghanistan.

The attacks, which were immediately claimed by the Taliban, killed more than 20 people, including a local reporter who worked the BBC and ABC, and left dozens more wounded.

Two platoons of Australian soldiers were involved in the immediate response to the attacks on the town and helped to evacuate eight wounded US troops, but there were no Australian casualties.

The Australian base at Tarin Kowt is on heightened alert as a precaution.

"The base is safe and the base was safe earlier today," Colonel Bob Akam, the commander of Combined Task Force Uruzgan, said.

The assault was the deadliest insurgent attack in Afghanistan for several weeks and came after NATO-led forces symbolically handed over security control of seven areas of the war-torn country to Afghan troops.

And it flies in the face of assurances by the Australian Government that the situation in Uruzgan province is improving.

Gunmen and suicide bombers attacked several compounds, including the governor's base, and tried to push their way through the compound of the national television station and into the headquarters of a local militia leader Matiullah Khan.

One of the bombers blew himself up; another suicide bomber detonated his explosives when he was shot by Afghan troops.

The explosions were followed by exchanges of fire between insurgents and Afghan soldiers which lasted several hours, with Australian troops called in to help coordinate the coalition response to the assault.

Eyewitnesses said NATO helicopter gunships were firing from the air and the battle spread to the local market, where some shopkeepers were forced to barricade themselves into their shops.

Reporter killed

The BBC confirmed one of its Afghan reporters, Omid Khpalwak, was among those killed.

Khpalwak had also worked for the ABC on programs including Four Corners and was a very courageous journalist who was well known to reporters in Uruzgan and Kabul.

High-profile militia leader Matiullah Khan, whose compound appeared to be one of the targets of the attack, was unharmed and blamed foreign fighters for the attacks.

"This is our neighbours Iran and Pakistan, they kill our national leaders inside Afghanistan, they want our people to be their slaves," he said.

Matiullah Khan commands around 2,000 fighters protecting NATO convoys along the highway that runs from Uruzgan to Kandahar city further south.

His uncle Jan Mohammad Khan, the former governor of Uruzgan and a close ally of president Hamid Karzai, was killed in a gun attack on his Kabul home nearly two weeks ago, five days after the president's half-brother was shot dead in Kandahar.

Taliban spokesman Qari Yousuf Ahmadi said the attackers were from the insurgent group, but denied killing the reporter, saying the police were responsible for his death.

The latest southern unrest comes at a critical juncture in the nearly 10-year war on Taliban-led insurgents, as thousands of US surge troops prepare to go home and other Western nations announce limited withdrawals of soldiers.

All foreign combat forces are due to leave Afghanistan by the end of 2014 and last week a first tranche of handovers from NATO to Afghan forces took place in seven parts of the country.

ABC/wires

Topics: unrest-conflict-and-war, terrorism, afghanistan

First posted