Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Desperately ill and growing weaker, one of the world’s most wanted terrorist masterminds summoned his men to his bedside.

Mullah Omar, once the all-powerful Taliban ruler of Afghanistan, was dying after years in exile, his kidney disease worsened by poisons slipped into his medicine.

Bearded men filed into the darkened room, their AK47s close to hand, and bowed to the 65-year-old fighter and scholar they called Amir ul-Momineen – Commander of the Faithful.

Omar’s inner circle, led by his deputy and would-be heir Mullah Akhtar Mansoor, listened intently as their leader whispered his final will.

(Image: Getty)

Mansoor discovered he was not to be made leader. His hand on a nine-millimetre pistol hidden in his garments, he suddenly interrupted him and asked why.

Then, with Omar refusing to give the answer he wanted and staring back defiantly with his one eye, Mansoor drew the gun and shot him – once in the face and twice in the stomach.

(Image: EPA/AFGHAN TALIBAN MILITANTS / HANDOUT)

The murderous coup was a treacherous end, even for a man whose fighters caused the deaths of 454 UK troops and thousands of civilians in Afghanistan’s 13-year-war.

And it is feared his execution, described in chilling detail by former senior Taliban commander Omar Khitab, may now spark a perfect and unprecedented storm of terrorism and bloody civil war.

A security source told the Daily Mirror: “This has deadly implications. Mansoor’s influence could plunge the region back into horrific chaos. And as Afghanistan stares into the abyss, so will the rest of the world.”

There have been previous claims that Omar was poisoned in the Afghan city of Kandahar or that he died at a Karachi hospital in Pakistan. But Khitab said an investigation he conducted found that the mullah was murdered by Mansoor.

Khitab quit the Taliban in 2011 when he heard that its deputy chief, acting as caretaker leader because Omar was ill, was opening an office in Qatar.

He claimed that Mansoor struck secret deals allowing the CIA to leave more than 1,000 special forces troops in Afghanistan and promised Shia-run Iran he would wage war on Islamic State, whose brutal Sunni fanatics have now gained huge territories across Asia and North Africa.

And he said Omar, far from controlling the Taliban, was kept prisoner by Mansoor for about two years, too ill to object.

Khitab, now head of an Islamic group called Fidai Mahaz, went on: “When Amir ul-Momineen was reciting his will, Mansoor told him, ‘You can’t name anyone else chief as I’m running the movement. Say I will be chief.’

Mullah Omar said he had already given so much. He recalled he sacrificed his Emirate of Afghanistan by protecting al-Qaeda’s leader Osama bin Laden after 9/11 in 2001 and refusing to hand him over to America, thereby starting the war.

“He also told Mansoor he could not give the Taliban leadership to someone who wanted to do such dishonourable deals.

“So Mansoor shot him in the face and stomach. Amir ul-Momineen was killed, first by poison then shot. He needed medicine for his illness and Mansoor told him Pakistani treatment available could not be trusted. So he offered to get medicine from Dubai – and put poison in it.

“That poison damaged Omar’s liver. As he was dying Mansoor and his cronies tried to force him to make the will. When he refused they martyred him.”

He claimed Omar died at the southern Afghanistan hide-out in the afternoon of about April 23, 2013 – three days after the poisoning started.

Khitab said he visited Omar’s grave at Zabul province in southern Afghanistan – but the burial site is being kept secret in case intruders abuse the body of the man who created the Taliban in 1994.

“But I have pictures of the grave and we may reveal the spot when the time is right,” he added.

Anarchy already blights Afghanistan less than a year after the last British and American troops pulled out.

The threat of more war there looms as Mansoor’s shadowy pledge to the CIA to fight IS means old Taliban alliances will split and explode in violence.

Former Taliban warlord Hafiz Saeed Khan is now in charge of IS operations in Afghanistan, northern Pakistan and part of Iran – and may harbour grudges against his former fellow fighters.

IS hates Shia Muslims, who form most of Iran’s population, and has committed atrocities on them across the Middle East and North Africa.

If Khitab’s claim is correct that Mansoor is doing deals with Iran to attack IS, it could mean Tehran will be arming his Taliban network for such a conflict.

And that has horrific implications for the world, as the weapons could be sold on or given to third parties.

The security source said: “The passing-on of arms by a nation to influence internal war has often gone spectacularly wrong. In the 80s the UK and US gave weapons to the Mujahideen fighting the Russians in Afghanistan, then worried about those same weapons being used against them.

“Ground-to-air missiles were good for attacking Soviet helicopters but can also bring down passenger jets. When the Taliban controlled Afghanistan in the 1990s, there were fears residual weaponry may fall into the hands of guests al-Qaeda. It’s the same thing in Iraq and Syria, where rebels have been given weapons to oppose Assad and now IS has them.

“Afghanistan’s Taliban have not so far been interested in jihad abroad. But with IS getting a foothold there and deals made with jihadists to take them on, their new head Mansoor has proved less a stickler for rules than Mullah Omar.

“Either Afghanistan beats IS off, and that’s unlikely, or forms allegiances with it – and that is a big worry.

“Then you are talking about a war between Iran and Afghanistan’s jihadists, and the West will be forced to take part.”