Despite this, it now appears Karzai had been courting Baradar as part of recent attempts to spark talks with the insurgents. The reconciliation of violent extremists is increasingly finding support among influential members of the international community. The Pakistan military wants to play a central role in any such efforts, and its move against Baradar and at least four other key members of the Taliban’s Quetta council, or shura, is an attempt to control the channels of communication with the Afghan insurgents.

Many Afghans are rightly suspicious of the Karzai government’s desire to strike a deal with the leaders of a movement that plunged the country into a period of repressive isolation, gave succor to Al Qaeda in the 1990s, and has killed thousands of Afghan civilians.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Given that counter-insurgency is about gaining the support of the people, one would have expected that bringing to justice those who have wantonly killed Afghan civilians would be a priority for the Afghan government and the coalition. But the opposite appears to be true.

Kabul recently surreptitiously resurrected an amnesty law that grants immunity to the warlords who currently rule the country and to the brutal extremists who seek to supplant them. The law may well apply to Baradar if he agreed to join the reconciliation process. This controversial “National Reconciliation, General Amnesty and National Stability Law” had languished in legal limbo since first appearing three years ago, until it was put on the books late last year in an apparent election-related deal with several of Karzai’s key supporters. The law grants blanket amnesty to the perpetrators of some of the worst atrocities, forcing victims to negotiate their claims through the virtually defunct Afghan justice system.

The United States and most of its allies have been largely silent on the law. In fact, it appears that a desire for a quick exit by NATO has stifled all discussion of the critical need to link reconciliation with accountability and to tackle Afghanistan’s longstanding culture of impunity. But expediency will not promote stability.

Fortunately, there may be another route to accountability, at least for those bearing greatest responsibility for atrocities in Afghanistan. Back in 2003, Afghanistan signed up to the International Criminal Court, and the court’s prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, is currently considering whether to open a formal investigation into war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the last seven years. Amnesty laws are not effective against I.C.C. prosecutions.

Until now, a key obstacle to any attempted I.C.C. prosecution of Taliban leaders has been that they have been beyond the reach of the court. But with Baradar in custody in Pakistan, the prosecutor should now launch a formal investigation and, if he believes he has evidence to justify it, seek an arrest warrant for Baradar and ask Pakistan to hand him over to The Hague. Kabul and Washington should support such an application and finally demonstrate to the Afghan people that there is a limit to impunity for those who committed the worst crimes against them.