Open city leaves militants relatively free to strike at will around official installations and hotels

Today's attacks at the heart of Kabul were the biggest and most complex ­assault on the Afghan capital since the fall of the Taliban in 2001.

But although the scale was more ambitious than previous attacks, the style was familiar. The attacks on ­government buildings less than a year ago now look like a smaller dress rehearsal, involving, as they did, eight Taliban fighters and three main targets.

In between such spectaculars, attacks of one sort or another are common in Kabul. A western security official estimated there is a security incident, on average, every seven to 10 days.

The last few weeks have been a good illustration. On 15 December a suicide car bomber struck near a Kabul hotel. There were isolated rocket attacks on 26 December and 7 January, and then again last Friday.

As the capital of a country at the height of an insurgency that has been escalating over the past seven years as the Taliban seek to claw back control, Kabul is an inevitable and easy target.

It is the government's most vulnerable point, as attacks there cause immediate loss of face. The city also lies close to one of the main focal points of the conflict, the eastern provinces of Kunar and Laghman, where an insurgent group known as the Haqqani network is active.

The group, based in North Waziristan in Pakistan's tribal areas, is thought to have been responsible for last February's attacks and another bloody and well-planned attack two years ago on the Serena hotel, a favourite of visiting westerners. The network is consequently a leading suspect for the latest attack.

The Afghan government and its Nato supporters were tonight presenting the incident as the reflection of a glass half full, pointing to the quick response of the Afghan security forces.

Amarullah Saleh, the head of the NDS, Afghanistan's domestic intelligence agency, said "60%" of the attackers were killed before they could blow themselves up. "We did not allow them to spread catastrophe. By sacrificing their lives [the security forces] saved tens of Afghan civilians," Saleh said.

Brigadier General Éric Tremblay, the spokesman for Nato's International Security Assistance Force (Isaf) said: "This was an Afghan-led operation, rapidly seizing the initiative and rapidly neutralising a complex and synchronised attack."

As a result, Tremblay said, the insurgents were not able to inflict the sort of death and mayhem they had clearly intended to with so many suicide bombs.

But the attack was undoubtedly a blow to the image the Afghan government likes to project, of a country making its way towards normality.

President Hamid Karzai has called an international conference in Kabul this spring. If the conference were to go ahead, it would be under the same sort of conditions as Karzai's second inauguration, last November. Then, the whole city was closed down to allow the safe arrival and departure of hundreds of ­visiting foreign dignitaries.

Closing down Kabul for any longer than a couple of days is not realistic. It is a bustling, crowded city of 3.5 million people which is growing rapidly at its edges. Foreign embassies and Isaf's headquarters are protected by multiple checkpoints. Those enclaves could be expanded to include the central business district and the main ministries, creating a Baghdad-style green zone, but only at the cost of strangling the economy and handing the insurgents a victory.

At present the police guard the main routes into the city and conduct occasional checks, sometimes as the result of intelligence. They could be made more rigorous, but that would bring an already sluggish flow of traffic to a standstill, and many bombers would still get through.

Tremblay argued that cities are impossible to defend against determined attackers who are willing to sacrifice their lives, citing the examples of the deadly attacks on Mumbai, London and Madrid.

The only short-term defence is intelligence. Zemerai Bashary, the interior ministry spokesman, said there had been intelligence reports that a ­spectacular attack was on its way, but that those reports were not specific enough. A bomber with a car full of explosives was stopped on his way into Kabul on Sunday night. It was not clear whether he was linked to the attacks, but it seems likely, and in that case there could have been an intelligence failure.

"There had been steady indications that there was going to be an attempt to do something like this," a western security official said. "But with all the information you have coming in, how do you separate the wheat from the chaff? Many informants are paid, and so tell you what they think you want to hear. We try to cross-reference the information we get, but it's a difficult game to play."

In the longer term, most Afghan and western analysts agree, it is impossible to isolate the capital. Such attacks on Kabul are only likely to stop when the insurgency ends, and that will require a political settlement that still appears far off.

Timeline of Kabul attacks

14 January 2008 Six people are killed, including a Norwegian journalist, in attack on the gym at the Serena hotel.

27 April President Hamid Karzai survives assassination attempt during a military parade close to his presidential palace. Three civilians are killed.

7 July sA suicide car bomb outside the Indian embassy kills 58 in biggest attack in the city since the war began.

20 October Two Taliban gunmen kill British aid worker Gayle Williams as she walks to work, accusing her of spreading Christian propaganda.

25 October David Giles, a Briton working for courier company DHL, is shot dead along with a South African colleague and an Afghan guard.

30 October - Five people die after suicide bomber blows himself up inside information ministry. The Taliban say foreign advisers inside were the targets.

11 February 2009 Taliban fighters, including suicide bombers, storm two government buildings. More than 20 people killed and nearly 50 wounded.

15 August Taliban suicide bomber kills seven and wounds 90 outside the headquarters for the Nato-led force.

17 September 10 Afghan civilians and six Italian soldiers die in a suicide car bomb attack on a road between Kabul's airport and the US embassy.

8 October Seven Afghan civilians are killed and 45 wounded in a blast outside the Indian embassy.

28 October Five foreign UN staff are killed when militants attack the Bekhtar international guest house.

13 November Car bomb explodes near a Nato convoy outside a US military base, injuring nine foreign soldiers, several civilian contractors and Afghan bystanders.

15 December Suicide car bomber strikes outside a former vice president's home in the main diplomatic neighbourhood, killing eight and wounding dozens.

18 January 2010 Attacks on multiple locations, including shopping malls and the central bank, kill at least four ­security forces and one civilian. ­Security officials say at least nine of the attackers were killed.