THE biggest day in American sport is almost here, with the Patriots taking on the Eagles in Super Bowl LII on Monday morning, Australian time. Here’s everything you need to know about the mammoth game, and where to watch in Brisbane.

Teams

New England Patriots

- Owned by Robert Kraft - net worth is $US6.2 billion (Forbes)

- Based in Boston and coached by Bill Belichick

- Super Bowl Titles: 2001, 2003, 2004, 2014, 2016

Philadelphia Eagles

- Owned by Jeffrey Lurie - net worth $2 billion - and former wife Christine Weiss Lurie

- Based in Philadelphia and coached by Doug Pederson

- Super Bowl Titles: Nil

Kick-Off

9.30am (Brisbane time)

Odds (Ladbrokes)

New England Patriots $1.52 / -4 points $1.91

Philadelphia Eagles: $2.60 / +4 points $1.91

TV

Channel 7, 7Mate

Stadium

U.S Bank Stadium, Minneapolis, Minnesota

Opened July 2016

Cost $US1.129 billion

A fixed roof stadium with a capacity of 66,200 (expandable to 73,000)

Home to the Minnesota Vikings

Weather forecast

High: -14C / Low: -16C

Where to Watch Brisbane

Normanby Hotel: Musgrave Rd, Red Hill from 9am. Hot Dogs and Hamburgers for breakfast

Treasury Casino: The Kitty Bar from 9.30am. VIP package includes reserved seating, beverages and food.

Eatons Hill Tavern: South Pine Rd, Eatons Hill from 8am in the beer garden.

Regatta Hotel: Coronation Dve, Toowong. Open from 6.30am and “American food all day”.

Australian National Hotel (Aussie Nash): Stanley St, Woolloongabba from 8.30am

Chermside Tavern: Chermside shopping Centre from 8.30am.

History

The New England Patriots are chasing their sixth title, while also going back-to-back after their 2017 Super Bowl win.

The Philadelphia Eagles are aiming for their first title.

This is the first Super Bowl in Minnesota since 1992, when the Washington Redskins defeated the Buffalo Bills, 37-24.

Half-time entertainment

Justin Timberlake is back yet again.

The Grammy Award-winning singer will make his third half-time appearance, having previously performed in 2001 and 2004 when he accidentally exposed Janet Jackson’s breast in what was deemed to be a wardrobe malfunction.

US Anthem

Pink will sing the national anthem, while Leslie Odom Jr. will perform “America the Beautiful.”

Player watch

Tom Brady (Patriots)

Superman-like quarterback. One of only two players to win five Super Bowls and the only one to achieve that all with the one team. He is to the Patriots what Dustin Martin is to Richmond in the AFL and Cameron Smith is to the Melbourne Storm in the NRL.

Fletcher Cox (Eagles)

Defensive tackle who may just be Brady’s kryptonite. He’s considered the player most likely by several US outlets to play a major role if the Eagles are to triumph.

Rules and jargon

Game time

The quarters are actually just 15 minutes but it seems to take forever. Each team receives three time-outs per half and the clock stops when the ball is carried out of bounds, there’s an incomplete pass or a turnover and when there is a score.

Down

Teams have four downs (chances) top advance 10 yards and if they do that, they get another four chances and so on.

Snap

The action of the centre throwing the ball backwards between their legs to the quarterback to start play.

The Wildcat

Any offensive play where any player other than the quarterback receives the ‘snap’.

The Shotgun

When the quarterback stands three to five metres from the centre so he has more time to read the play before dishing the ball off to a teammate.

Two-point conversion

Following a touchdown, the offensive team can either kick for an extra point from the 15 yard line or have one attempt to score another touchdown, from just two yards, for two points.

Challenge

The coaches get two chances per half to challenge the referee’s call. To do this they need to throw a red flag onto the field. Just like cricket, if they get the review correct, they get to keep retain the challenge.

Sack

When the quarterback is brought down before getting rid of the ball.