CLOSE NBC will package Super Bowl LII and Pyeongchang Winter Olympics ad combos for advertisers. USA TODAY Sports

NBC is hoping to sell advertisers on ads for Super Bowl LII and the Winter Olympics in 2018. (Photo: James Lang-USA TODAY Sports)

To ease the burden of Super Bowl advertising, NBC will offer advertisers a package to run their ad during Super Bowl LII as well as during the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, less than a week later.

The cost of advertising during the Super Bowl has increased every year since advertisers paid $42,000 for Super Bowl I in 1967. In 2007, it was $2.6 million. Last year, it was between $5 and $5.5 million. Ads are sold well ahead of time, with most of the spots taken by early December.

One 30-second ad in the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi cost a little less than $100,000 on average, with most advertisers running their spot several times throughout the proceedings.

“You can create a spot that runs in the Super Bowl and you can amortize your costs of creating it by running it in the Olympics,” NBC Sports Group executive vice president of ad sales Dan Lovinger told Variety. "The one-two punch of the Super Bowl followed by the Olympics makes it all worthwhile."

What will that cost be? Lovinger told Variety that NBC would be after "maximum value," but didn't give an exact figure.

Super Bowl ads continue to be their own form of big business. Previews are coming out earlier on social networks, YouTube and other sites. At USA TODAY's Ad-Meter page, previews were coming out as early as Jan. 12.

NBC is trying to sell advertisers on the idea that they'll be getting good ratings in a compact window with Super Bowl and Olympics broadcasts, citing research that indicates TV viewing is up 16% for big events.

“It will be the single biggest night in TV followed by the single biggest event,” Lovinger told Variety. “That’s pretty rare.”

NBC is the first network to air the Super Bowl and Winter Olympics in the same year since 1992. That year, CBS had the Washington Redskins beating the Buffalo Bills 37-24 in XXVI on Jan. 26, and then on Feb. 8 had the Games in Albertville, France, when most of the events were shown on tape delay.