Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images

The unexpected aerial duel between Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Nick Foles and New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady produced one of the most entertaining Super Bowls in NFL history.

Foles and the Eagles won their first Super Bowl and first NFL championship since 1960 by a 41-33 margin on Sunday night at U.S. Bank Stadium.

The 1,151 combined total yards earned by the Eagles and Patriots was the highest total in NFL regular-season and playoff history, per NFL Research.

Among the oddities in the box score were a 500-yard passing performance in defeat from Brady, a touchdown pass from Eagles tight end Trey Burton to Foles, an undrafted rookie running back leading the Eagles in receiving yards and a trio of 100-yard receiving performances by the Patriots.

Quarter-By-Quarter Score

1st Quarter: Eagles 9, Patriots 3

2nd Quarter: Eagles 22, Patriots 12

3rd Quarter: Eagles 29, Patriots 26

Final: Eagles 41, Patriots 33

Super Bowl LII Stats

Passing Stats

Eagles

Nick Foles: 28-of-43, 373 yards, 3 TD, INT

Trey Burton: 1-of-1, 1 yard, TD

Patriots

Tom Brady: 28-of-48, 505 yards, 3 TD

Danny Amendola: 0-of-1, 0 yards

It's still hard to believe Brady threw for 505 yards and lost the Super Bowl. The 40-year-old's numbers were the best in any NFL postseason game, per Michael David Smith of Pro Football Talk.

Brady distributed his 28 completions to seven different receivers, but it's the one pass he didn't throw that left us questioning the decision-making skills of the New England coaching staff.

Wide receiver Danny Amendola's incomplete pass in the direction of Brady appeared to be a touchdown if the quarterback hauled in the pass on the right sideline, and at the least it would've been a substantial gain and momentum boost for the Patriots.

Little did we know Burton would achieve success on a similar play on fourth down as he hit quarterback Nick Foles in the end zone.

Mark Humphrey/Associated Press

Foles, who won Most Valuable Player by throwing three touchdowns of his own, became the first player to throw and catch a touchdown in the Super Bowl, per NFL Research.

Rushing Stats

Eagles

LeGarrette Blount: 14 carries, 90 yards, TD

Jay Ajayi: 9 carries, 57 yards

Nelson Agholor: 1 carry, 9 yards

Corey Clement: 3 carries, 8 yards

Patriots

James White: 7 carries, 45 yards, TD

Dion Lewis: 9 carries, 39 yards

Rex Burkhead: 3 carries, 18 yards

Tom Brady: 1 carry, 6 yards

Chris Hogan: 1 carry, 4 yards

Brandin Cooks: 1 carry, 1 yard

The Eagles used more balance on offense with 44 passes and 27 runs compared to the 49 passes and 22 rushes the Patriots totaled.

Although it may not seem like a huge disparity in play calls, the extra runs the Eagles called helped set up their scores.

Philadelphia running back LeGarrette Blount, who carried the ball 11 times for 31 yards in Super Bowl LI for the Patriots, carried the load with 90 yards and a touchdown, while Jay Ajayi played an important supporting role by providing 57 yards on nine carries.

Jonathan Daniel/Getty Images

Blount and Eagles defensive end Chris Long became the first players to win a Super Bowl with one team and then defeat them the next year in the championship game, per ESPN Stats and Info.

New England never found itself in a rhythm on the ground. If you take away James White's 26-yard touchdown scamper, he'd have 19 yards on six carries.

Dion Lewis added 4.3 yards per rush, but he was never able to impact the game like Blount and Ajayi.

Receiving Stats

Eagles

Corey Clement: 4 receptions, 100 yards, TD

Nelson Agholor: 9 receptions, 84 yards

Alshon Jeffery: 3 receptions, 73 yards, TD

Zach Ertz: 7 receptions, 67 yards, TD

Torrey Smith: 5 receptions, 49 yards

Nick Foles: 1 reception, 1 yard, TD

Patriots

Danny Amendola: 8 receptions, 152 yards

Chris Hogan: 6 receptions, 128 yards, TD

Rob Gronkowski: 9 receptions, 116 yards, 2 TD

Rex Burkhead: 1 reception, 46 yards

Brandin Cooks: 1 reception, 23 yards

James White: 2 receptions, 21 yards

Phillip Dorsett: 1 reception, 19 yards

Eagles running back Corey Clement, an undrafted rookie out of Wisconsin, was the only 100-yard receiver for the Super Bowl champions, and he barely eclipsed triple digits.

Clement became the second rookie to record 100 receiving yards and a receiving touchdown in Super Bowl history. Torry Holt of the St. Louis Rams was the other player, but Clement is the only undrafted player to achieve the feat, per ESPN Stats & Info.

Foles relied on wide receiver Alshon Jeffery and tight end Zach Ertz on scoring plays, but he also took advantage of wide receiver Nelson Agholor's mismatch in the slot and found him for a team high nine receptions.

The lasting memory of Amendola from Super Bowl LII will be his incomplete pass to Brady, but he was able to rack up 152 receiving yards on a monster night through the air for the Patriots.

Jonathan Daniel/Getty Images

Wide receiver Chris Hogan took over in the absence of fellow wideout Brandin Cooks by hauling in six catches for 128 yards, while tight end Rob Gronkowski did most of his work in the second half as he beat the Eagles for a pair of scores.

Despite benefiting from unprecedented success in the passing game, the Patriots couldn't pull through with the game-winning touchdowns they're accustomed to scoring in the fourth quarter of the Super Bowl.

Follow Joe on Twitter, @JTansey90.

Statistics obtained from ESPN.com and Pro Football Reference.