The National Football League announced that six Philadelphia Eagles were selected to the 2018 Pro Bowl, which will be played on January 28, 2018 at Camping World Stadium in Orlando, Florida.

More on each player below:

BRANDON BROOKS GETS FIRST PRO BOWL NOD

For the first time in his career, right guard Brandon Brooks is headed to the Pro Bowl. Through 14 games, Brooks has played in 99 percent of the team's offensive snaps. He’s been a crucial contributor to the Philadelphia run game that ranks second in rushing yards this season. Brooks came to Philadelphia from the Texans a season ago and has cemented himself as a force alongside right tackle Lane Johnson.

"I was excited but I come from a unit where we all are straight brothers. So it’s not like an individual accolade," Brooks said. "It’s (offensive line coach Jeff Stoutland) Stout coaching me up, getting me right, refining my technique, and things like that. Playing alongside Lane Johnson and Jason Kelce helps tremendously and Carson (Wentz) playing well and making plays. So although it’s kind of an individual honor, I wouldn’t be able to do it without playing in between these two guys and guys making plays in the backfield too." - David George

FLETCHER COX NEARING HISTORY WITH THIRD STRAIGHT SELECTION

Defensive tackle Fletcher Cox captures his third consecutive Pro Bowl appearance. In his sixth season, Cox has been the focal point of an Eagles pass rush that ranks in the top 10 in sacks and a run defense that is No. 1 in the league. Cox picked up his second career touchdown on a fumble recovery against the Redskins in Week 1. The Yazoo City, Mississippi native becomes the first Eagles defensive tackle to earn three or more Pro Bowl distinctions since Charlie Johnson did so from 1980-82. Only one defensive lineman in franchise history has more Pro Bowl nominations and that's the legend Reggie White.

"It’s an honor just to be in a conversation with those guys," Cox said. "Never would I thought in a million years I’d be in the same conversation with Reggie White and Jerome Brown. I wouldn’t have thought of that. I've just got to keep stacking. Just have to keep being the leader that I am, being a tempo-setter and just going out and being the best Fletcher that I can be and at the end of the day pick my head up and see where I’m at each season.” - David George

ZACH ERTZ: REWARDING TO BE PLAYING FOR TITLE CONTENDER



Tight end Zach Ertz has put up big numbers in the past, but for the first time, he's an integral part of a team that's on the verge of clinching the No. 1 seed in the playoffs.

"I've never had a team like this. The ultimate goal is to win football games in this league. If you don't win, nothing really matters. That's what's been so rewarding this year. I've been a really big contributor on a really good football team. I think that whole process has been really fulfilling," said Ertz, the team's first Pro Bowl tight end since Chad Lewis in 2002.

Ertz is tied for first in the NFC among tight ends with 63 receptions and eight touchdowns. He's all alone in first in the conference at his position group with 719 receiving yards.

From the time that he was selected in the second round of the 2013 NFL Draft, Ertz has said that when it's all said and done he wants to be the best tight end to have ever played for this franchise. On the night of his first Pro Bowl nomination, Ertz only wanted to thank the people who got him to this place.

"I wouldn't be the player I am right now without arguably the best tight end in Eagles history up to date in Brent (Celek). ... It feels great to have this honor. It's a testament to not only the people who have helped me along the way but also the coaching staff and the front office having the trust in me to bring me here in the first place, so it's been a fun journey thus far," Ertz said.

Ertz's ascension to the ranks of the elite tight ends in the game is due in large part to his ability to dominate in the red zone. All eight of his touchdowns have come inside the 20-yard line.

"The whole offseason was focused on that red zone. The red zone and third down were the two primary focuses of the entire offseason. From the beginning of OTAs when we showed up, the coaches emphasized it to the end of Training Camp. Dang near every competitive period was down there to see how we could get each other better, the offense and the defense," Ertz said.

"The coaches have put me in situations to be successful, to do what I'm good at which is use my body and extend for the ball and use my size down there. There's been a lot of hard work and luckily I've made plays when the ball is in the air. The quarterbacks feel comfortable in throwing me the ball. I also think having the complete offense we have right now has helped me tremendously." - Chris McPherson

MALCOLM JENKINS: MAN OF THE YEAR

The Eagles' nominee for the Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award presented by Nationwide (read below) has been a leader in the community, but also a critical part of the team's on-field success in 2017. The Eagles' leader in tackles with 107, Jenkins also has nine tackles for loss, two interceptions, 12 pass deflections, and four QB hurries. This is his second Pro Bowl selection.

LANE JOHNSON: A MAN ON A MISSION

The Eagles believed in tackle Lane Johnson.

They used the No. 4 overall pick on the Oklahoma lineman in 2013, at the time it was the team's highest draft pick in over a decade.

After his third NFL season, Johnson was signed to a six-year contract with the intent of one day moving him from the right side of the line to the left to take over for future Hall of Famer Jason Peters .

Last year, however, Johnson was suspended 10 games for his second violation of the league's policy on performance-enhancing drugs. The Eagles struggled in Johnson's absence and after a 3-0 start to the 2016 campaign fell out of the playoff picture.

He spent a lot of time this offseason knowing that he had to repay the organization for the commitment it made to him. And he's done just that.

Johnson earned his first Pro Bowl nomination Tuesday. He is the first Eagles right tackle to earn the honor since Jon Runyan in 2002.

"It's been one of my goals to be called one of the best in the world at what you do, so it's pretty special," Johnson said. "I knew that the ability was there. I knew I had my work cut out. I wanted to play well and give back to the organization. I'm grateful for them giving me an opportunity to prove myself and that's all I really needed. It's really about me getting out of my own way." - Chris McPherson

CARSON WENTZ ENTERED THE NATIONAL SPOTLIGHT IN 2017

Perhaps it should come as no surprise that quarterback Carson Wentz notched his first Pro Bowl selection compliments of an outstanding sophomore campaign. Before his season was regrettably cut short with an ACL injury, Wentz put up MVP-caliber numbers while raking in an extensive list of accolades.

Wentz led the Eagles to an 11-2 start, clinching a playoff spot during his final game. He had six games with three touchdown passes and four games with four and had thrown at least one touchdown pass and no more than one interception in 15 straight games, which is tied for the sixth-longest streak by an NFL quarterback since 1950. He was also awarded Offensive Player of the Month honors in October.

His popularity has soared among across the league as his No. 11 jersey was the best-seller in October and November. He finished first among all NFC players in the fan vote for the Pro Bowl. Wentz becomes the first Eagles quarterback selected to the Pro Bowl since teammate Nick Foles did it back in 2013.

“I do think that this year, obviously we wanted to see as coaches, those increases from a year ago. We wanted to see that incremental increase with Carson in his development and his growth and that's what you're seeing,” head coach Doug Pederson said. “Is there room for improvement? Yes, yes, there is, and he’ll continue to even get better.” - David George