The New England Patriots defense was supposed to turn things around in Week 4.

They did not.

In a 33-30 loss to the Caronlina Panthers, the Patriots let up over 30 points for the third time in four weeks. What’s worse, the defense couldn’t get the Panthers offense off the field on the final drive, which finished with Graham Gano’s game-winning kick. Throughout the game, Cam Newton looked like Superman.

Here are some statistics, some X’s and O’s and some quotes that help illustrate the sad state of the Patriots defense after four weeks of NFL action.

The numbers:

While the game against the Panthers felt like a breaking point, the performance was actually an improvement in terms of yards allowed per game. The 444 yards allowed were better than their average on the year, as noted by MassLive’s Kevin Duffy.

The Patriots gave up 444 yards of offense and actually improved their season average. — Kevin Duffy (@KevinRDuffy) October 1, 2017

Needless to say, their yards allowed per game still isn’t pretty. They are the worst in the NFL, and it’s not even close. With 456.8 yards allowed per game, the Patriots are averaging 60 yards more than the 31st-ranked Indianapolis Colts.

The Patriots are last in the NFL in yards allowed, and by a big margin. Allowing an average of 60 yards more per game than the No. 31 team. — Ryan Hannable (@RyanHannable) October 2, 2017

One of the biggest issues for New England has been their inability to defend the pass. They’ve allowed countless big plays, largely due to busted coverage and communication issues. As a result, the Patriots have given up huge days to Chiefs quarterback Alex Smith, Saints quarterback Drew Brees, Texans quarterback Deshaun Watson and Newton.

Every quarterback that has played New England has racked up 300 yards passing, according to NFL Research.

The Patriots have allowed the opposing QB to throw for 300+ pass yards in all 4 games this season. They had 3 such games all of last season — NFL Research (@NFLResearch) October 1, 2017

In terms of points allowed, the Patriots have narrowly avoided being the worst defense in the history of defending Super Bowl champions, according to ESPN Stats and Info.

The Patriots have given up 128 points, 1 shy of the most points allowed by a defending champion in their 1st 4 games (129 by the '87 Giants) pic.twitter.com/pd0CmliKOq — ESPN Stats & Info (@ESPNStatsInfo) October 2, 2017

The X’s and O’s

There were at least five different big plays where the Panthers had plays of 20 yards or more, and the catches went completely uncontested. Here are four of them.

A sampling of how wide open Carolina's pass-catchers were against the Patriots today: pic.twitter.com/zIWEBYoCUc — Zack Cox (@ZackCoxNESN) October 2, 2017

And I mean completely uncontested…

This was Kelvin Benjamin's 43-yard reception. Literally zero Patriots in the shot when he caught the ball. pic.twitter.com/LX5NH90Evk — Zack Cox (@ZackCoxNESN) October 2, 2017

Even when they made a good play, they often narrowly avoided a major mistake. On Malcolm Butler’s interception, Eric Rowe and Butler took the same receiver and left Devin Funchess wide open. Lucky for the cornerbacks, Newton inexplicable threw the ball into double coverage. Butler intercepted the pass.

Sometimes result of play overshadows coverage bust. Seems to be case on Malcolm Butler INT. Butler/Rowe follow Byrd. Funchess (17) wide open pic.twitter.com/qKEg90moBH — Mike Reiss (@MikeReiss) October 2, 2017

The quotes

Here is what the Patriots defensive players were saying after their 33-30 loss to the Panthers on Sunday in Week 4.

From cornerback Malcolm Butler: “We’re beating ourselves. We lost the game ourselves. It was nothing Carolina was doing. Basically, we beat ourselves [with] penalties. We’ve just got to do better overall, everywhere and every area.”

From safety Devin McCourty: “That’s just bad football. It’s bad. We’re letting the team down. It doesn’t matter right now offensively and special teams what we do right now. If we can’t play somewhat decent defense, it’s going to be hard to win games”

From safety Duron Harmon: “We need to go take a look in the mirror tonight and just look and realize. Are we doing enough to win? Are we doing enough to be good on defense? Are we doing enough to be a sound football team? Today we weren’t, especially on defense.”

From cornerback Stephon Gilmore: “Got to do better at communication. Got to see how my teammates see it. I’ve got to get better at it. … You’ve got to see it like everybody else sees it.”