Telemundo Deportes wraps up its coverage of the 2017-18 NFL season presenting the exclusive Spanish-language telecast of SUPER BOWL LII, live from U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis, MN. The telecast will air on Universo Sunday, Feb. 4. Coverage begins at 6 p.m. ET with a pre-game special, followed by the highly anticipated game featuring the New England Patriots and the Philadelphia Eagles.

Telemundo Deportes' coverage of the event will be led by Miguel Gurwitz, the main host of the pre-halftime-and-post game shows. The renowned announcing team of Rene Giraldo and Edgar LOPEZ will deliver the play by play and analysis together with special guest, Rolando Cantu, former Guard for the Arizona Cardinals, who will provide THE PLAYER insights and additional analysis surrounding the big game. Additionally, Telemundo Deportes NFL coverage mainstay, Veronica Contreras, will report from the field and on the sideline.

The game will also be streamed live via the Telemundo Deportes En Vivo app and TelemundoDeportes.com. Streaming will be available on desktops, tablets and connected TVs.<





The coverage of the game will be complemented by special Super Bowl content across Telemundo and Universo platforms, including "Road to Super Bowl," an NFL special that relives the season and THE JOURNEY that led the two teams to the Championship game. The program will air on Telemundo on Sunday, Feb. 4 at 2:30 p.m. ET.

In addition, "Titulares y Mas," the #1 nightly sports news, entertainment and commentary show in Spanish (Monday - Friday: 11:35 p.m. - Midnight ET; Saturday - Sunday: 11 p.m. - 11:30 p.m. ET), will be onsite throughout Super Bowl Week with extensive coverage leading up to game day, including segments and reports by the show host Karim Mendiburu and Cantu, starting today, Monday, Jan. 29.

Erika Csiszer, from Telemundo's Emmy Award-winning morning show "Un Nuevo Dia," and "Noticias Telemundo" correspondent Ruben Pereida will join the team onsite to provide complete coverage on Super Bowl Day. In addition, Regional Mexican singer and actor El Dasa, star of Universo's original scripted series "El Vato" is confirmed to attend the Super Bowl on behalf of Universo and Telemundo.