After Mystic Lake’s ambitious Club Nomadic concert series for Super Bowl revelers abruptly fell apart last week, the leftover pieces have fallen into place – although one of the acts has fallen off the calendar altogether.

Prices for all the shows have been slashed except one, Florida Georgia Line’s Feb. 3 performance. However, electropop singer Ellie Goulding has cancelled her Feb. 2 appearance, leaving her co-headliner Kygo (a Norwegian dance DJ) to perform solo that night.

For fans who paid the full $125-$200 prices to get inside the now-shelved Club Nomadic entertainment compound, Mystic Lake is offering a slightly oxymoronic-sounding “premium general admission experience” if they hold onto their tickets. Otherwise, refunds to all the concerts are being offered, and cheaper tickets to the three shows besides FGL are now on sale, along with new VIP options. Contact the Mystic Lake box office at 952-496-6563, visit mysticlake.com or Ticketmaster.com.

The three newly discounted performances – the Chainsmokers, Kygo and Gwen Stefani – are moving into Mystic Lake Center, where meetings and weddings are held. FGL is the only gig being moved into the Mystic Showroom, where concerts are typically held.

These shows are no longer affilliated with Nomadic Entertainment, the NFL-affiliated company that – as far as we know – are still putting on the Nomadic Live series at the Armory, although Nomadic and Armory representatives have not responded to requests for more information on those events.

Here are the show-by-show details at Mystic Lake according to their press release:

Thursday, February 1

Artist: The Chainsmokers

New venue: Mystic Lake Center

For existing ticket holders: $200 ticket holders can keep their tickets for a premium general admission experience which includes best access to the stage or they can receive a full refund by contacting the outlet where they purchased tickets.

For interested attendees: General admission tickets are on sale for $89.

Friday, February 2

Artist: Kygo

New venue: Mystic Lake Center

For existing ticket holders: $200 ticket holders will be refunded as the Ellie Goulding show has been canceled. These ticket holders can receive a full refund or partial refund in exchange for a lower-priced Kygo ticket by contacting the outlet where they purchased tickets.

For interested attendees: General admission tickets are on sale for $125 (with best access to the stage) or $59.

Saturday, February 3

Artist: Florida Georgia Line

New venue: Mystic Showroom

For existing ticket holders: $200 ticket holders can keep their tickets or they can receive a full refund by contacting the outlet where they purchased tickets

For interested attendees: General admission tickets are on sale for $200.

Sunday, February 4

Artist: Gwen Stefani

New venue: Mystic Lake Center

For existing ticket holders: $200 ticket holders can keep their tickets for a premium general admission experience which includes best access to the stage or they can receive a full refund by contacting the outlet where they purchased tickets.

For interested attendees: General admission tickets are on sale for $69.