NBC SPORTS ANNOUNCES SUPER BOWL LII ON-AIR TEAM FOR PATRIOTS-EAGLES – NETWORK’S 19TH SUPER BOWL BROADCAST

NBC’s Coverage Begins at Noon ET on Sunday, Feb. 4, from U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis, Minn.

“The GOAT against the UNDERDOGS, should be fun.” – Cris Collinsworth

STAMFORD, Conn. – January 22, 2018 – With the New England Patriots and Philadelphia Eagles set to face off in Super Bowl LII, NBC Sports Group today announced its broadcast team ahead of the network’s coverage of the game from Minneapolis, Minn. Coverage of Super Bowl LII from U.S. Bank Stadium begins Sunday, Feb. 4, at Noon ET on NBC.

Super Bowl LII marks the network’s 19th Super Bowl broadcast, and will feature an award-winning team with unparalleled experience. Seven-time Emmy Award-winner Al Michaels (play-by-play), in his record 32nd season as the voice of the NFL’s premier primetime package, and 16-time Emmy Award-winner Cris Collinsworth (analyst), who played in two Super Bowls as a member of the Cincinnati Bengals, will be in the booth, with two-time Emmy Award-winning reporter Michele Tafoya on the sideline for television’s most-watched show of the year. This marks the 10th Super Bowl assignment for Michaels, and the fourth for both Collinsworth and Tafoya.

Collinsworth announced his first Super Bowl as an analyst for FOX Sports in Feb. 2005, when the Patriots defeated the Eagles, 24-21, at Alltel Stadium.

Dan Patrick will host the Super Bowl LII pre-game show alongside co-host Liam McHugh, who will be joined by NBC Football Night in America teammates Tony Dungy, Rodney Harrison, Mike Florio and Chris Simms. Paul Burmeister, Kathryn Tappen and Randy Moss also will appear on the pre-game coverage. Burmeister and Moss will report from the Patriots’ and Eagles’ hotels, while Tappen will be on location from the NFL Tailgate Party. Motorsports icon and two-time Daytona 500 winning driver Dale Earnhardt Jr. will make his NBC debut as a contributor on the network’s pre-game coverage of Super Bowl LII.

Following are comments on the Eagles-Patriots Super Bowl LII matchup from Collinsworth, Pro Football Hall of Famer and Super Bowl-winning coach Tony Dungy, and Rodney Harrison, a former Patriot who won two Super Bowls with the team:

COLLINSWORTH

Collinsworth on calling Super Bowl LII: “I have the honor of broadcasting this, my fourth Super Bowl, and New England has been in all four. An amazing organization continues this amazing run. My first Super Bowl in the booth (Super Bowl XXXIX) was also Philadelphia-New England. The Pats look the same, the Eagles very different.”

Collinsworth on the matchup: “The Eagles defense has allowed 17 combined points in two playoff games. The pass rush of the Eagles will challenge Brady like the Jaguars did, and Nick Foles has a chance to complete one of the most incredible roller coaster rides in NFL history. The GOAT against the UNDERDOGS, should be fun.”

DUNGY

Dungy on what each team needs to do to win: “The Patriots need to slow down the Eagles pass rush and utilize their intermediate passing game. I see Tom Brady throwing the ball quite a bit to his backs and tight ends to bypass the Eagles’ excellent run defense. Bill Belichick will need to create confusing coverages to put doubts into Nick Foles’ mind, and to make him hold the ball just a bit longer.”

“The Eagles need to maintain their poise and keep being aggressive on offense. Doug Pederson has been aggressive all year, and their game plan really kept the Vikings off balance. Nick Foles is going to have to have another near-perfect game in order for them to win.”

HARRISON

Harrison on what each team needs to do to win: “New England needs to play the Patriot way. They need to put the ball into Tom Brady’s hands, utilize their tight ends, and block the Eagles front four. They won’t run consistently against the Eagles. Patrick Chung against Zack Ertz and Stephon Gilmore vs. Alshon Jeffrey are going to be key matchups to watch.”

“The Eagles need to continue to do what they’ve been doing, run the ball and — believe it or not — put the ball into Nick Foles’ hands to make plays. He’s gaining confidence. Doug Pederson called an unbelievable game against the Vikings, kept them off balance. They need to repeat that and stay aggressive.”

***

NBC’s coverage of Super Bowl LII is led by executive producer Fred Gaudelli and director Drew Esocoff, who will work their sixth Super Bowl together. Gaudelli and Esocoff led NBC’s coverage of Super Bowl XLIII, XLVI and XLIX, with the latter being the most-watched program in U.S. television history. NBC Sports’ Super Bowl week and pre-game coverage on NBC and NBCSN is led by executive producer and president, production, Sam Flood.

Telemundo Deportes continues its exclusive Spanish-language live NFL game telecasts on Universo, presenting Spanish-language coverage of Super Bowl LII. Telemundo Deportes’ commentators Edgar Lopez and Rene Giraldo call the Super Bowl on Universo, with Veronica Contreras serving as sideline reporter. Miguel Gurwitz will host the telecasts with pre and post-game studio coverage.

At the conclusion of NBC’s Super Bowl LII broadcast, NBCSN will televise a live post-game show from Minneapolis. Burmeister, Dungy and Harrison will be on-field post-game with live reaction and analysis, while McHugh, Florio and Simms will anchor post-game coverage from the main set inside U.S. Bank Stadium. Tappen and Moss will conduct post-game interviews.

McHugh, Tappen and Burmeister will also travel to PyeongChang, South Korea, following the game, where they will join the on-air team for the XXIII Olympic Winter Games beginning Feb. 8.

–NBC SPORTS GROUP–