Kelly Clarkson has been recruited to headline the NFL’s official Super Bowl warm-up parties on game day in downtown Minneapolis.

The original “American Idol” will perform at the 52 Live bash on the afternoon of Sunday, Feb. 4, a pre-game party for Super Bowl LII ticket holders at the Armory, two blocks from U.S. Bank Stadium. She will also sing for an even more select group of game attendees at another shindig that afternoon inside the stadium in the Delta 360 Sky Club.

Different VIP ticket packages are being sold to the game via SuperBowl.com with varying party options, ranging in price from $6,300 to $13,500.

TV personality and food blogger Andrew Zimmern, who lives in Edina, has already been announced as the “celebrity chef” overseeing the menus at these official SBLII parties. Many NFL alumni and another music act yet to be named will make appearances with Clarkson at these events.

The parties were organized by the NFL’s hospitality subsidiary, On Location Experiences (OLE), which sells the different Super Bowl ticket and travel packages. OLE now owns Nomadic Entertainment, the company putting on the Club Nomadic and Nomadic Live parties Feb. 1-4 at both the downtown Armory and Mystic Lake Casino Hotel in Prior Lake.

Nomadic already announced Jennifer Lopez as the headliner for the Super Saturday Night concert at the Armory, which will be broadcast via DirecTV the night before the game, Feb. 3. The company will also co-host country stars Florida Georgia Line that night at Mystic Lake, where Gwen Stefani was just announced as the post-game entertainer on Feb. 4.

OLE is also selling $67-$127 tickets and party packages for the Night Before Concert with the Dave Matthews Band at Xcel Energy Center on Feb. 3.

Xcel Center is where Clarkson last played in town in 2015, and now she’s back on the road again behind her new album “Meaning of Life.” She will perform to about 8,000 fans at the historic Armory, which is being remade into a hi-fi entertainment venue in time for SBLII.

@ChrisRstrib