Chris Berman, Steve Young and Randy Moss break down how Nick Foles and Doug Pederson were the difference-makers in the Eagles' victory over the Patriots. (2:33)

The Philadelphia Eagles outlasted the New England Patriots 41-33 in Super Bowl LII, led by an MVP performance by Nick Foles, and a late-game forced fumble by Brandon Graham.

It's the first Super Bowl victory for the franchise, and the first for any team from Philadelphia in the big four pro sports since the Phillies' World Series title in 2008.

Top stories:

Jump to: Conference title games | Divisional round | Wild-card games | Full schedule

Super Bowl LII

(1) Philadelphia Eagles 41, (1) New England Patriots 33

In a record-setting shootout between Nick Foles and Tom Brady, the backup quarterback led a pressure-packed 75-yard drive to the winning touchdown, 11 yards to Zach Ertz with 2:21 to go Sunday night. Then, a defense that had been shredded throughout the second half made two final stands -- including a strip-sack of Brady by Brandon Graham -- to clinch the win. Full recap.

AFC Championship Game

(3) Jacksonville Jaguars 20, (1) New England Patriots 24

The Jaguars jumped out to a 14-3 lead in the second quarter, but Tom Brady led a tremendous second half effort, including two touchdown catches by Danny Amendola, to earn another trip to the Super Bowl. The two teams combined for just one turnover -- a fumble by Dion Lewis recovered by Myles Jack. Complete recap.

NFC Championship Game

(2) Minnesota Vikings 7, (1) Philadelphia Eagles 38

The Vikings jumped out to an early 7-0 lead on a picture-perfect pass from Case Keenum to Kyle Rudolph, but it was all Eagles afterwards, as the home 'dogs scored 38 straight to punch their Super Bowl tickets. Eagles quarterback Nick Foles finished the game with 352 yards passing and three touchdowns, while Keenum managed 271 yards and the lone touchdown along with two picks. Complete recap.

AFC divisional round

(5) Tennessee Titans 14, (1) New England Patriots 35

After the Titans took a 7-0 lead in the first quarter, it was all Patriots thereafter. The fans who braved the cold in Foxborough witnessed 337 yards passing and three touchdowns from Tom Brady. Complete recap.

(3) Jacksonville Jaguars 45, (2) Pittsburgh Steelers 42

Jacksonville jumped out to a 21-0 lead and survived Ben Roethlisberger's five touchdown passes -- two on fourth-down heaves -- to advance to face the Patriots. Leonard Fournette finished with 109 rushing yards and three touchdowns. Complete recap

NFC divisional round

(1) Philadelphia Eagles 15, (6) Atlanta Falcons 10

Nick Foles completed 77 percent of his passes, and the Eagles defense had a stellar performance which including stopping the Falcons on a fourth-and-goal from the 2-yard line to seal the game. Philadelphia also overcame two lost fumbles, while Atlanta didn't have a turnover. Complete recap.

(2) Minnesota Vikings 29, (4) New Orleans Saints 24

Case Keenum hit Stefon Diggs for a 61-yard touchdown as time expired to give the Vikings the win. The Vikings had led the Saints 17-0 at halftime, but New Orleans scored three straight touchdowns. Complete recap.

AFC wild-card round

(5) Tennessee Titans 22, (4) Kansas City Chiefs 21

The Chiefs raced out to a 21-3 halftime lead, but Marcus Mariota and the Titans stormed back with 19 unanswered points as the Kansas City offense stalled. Derrick Henry rushed for 156 yards and a touchdown in the win. Complete recap.

(3) Jacksonville Jaguars 10, (6) Buffalo Bills 3

Neither quarterback had efficient passing days, but Blake Bortles had a touchdown pass, ran for 88 yards and committed no turnovers, while Tyrod Taylor had an interception and couldn't get the Bills in the end zone in the loss. Complete recap.

NFC wild-card round

(6) Atlanta Falcons 26, (3) Los Angeles Rams 13

Two early turnovers put the Rams in a hole, kicker Matt Bryant hit four field goals, and the Falcons' defense stifled Los Angeles when it mattered. Julio Jones had nine catches for 94 yards and a touchdown, and Atlanta didn't turn over the ball. Complete recap.

(4) New Orleans Saints 31, (5) Carolina Panthers 26

The Saints didn't get their ground game going, but Drew Brees torched the Carolina secondary for almost 380 yards and two touchdowns. Cam Newton had a big game, too, but the Panthers' defense didn't hold up in New Orleans. Complete recap.

Full schedule