Feherty Live Stage Performances to Take Place Thursday-Friday, Feb. 1-2, from the State Theatre in Downtown Minneapolis, Airing Live on Golf Channel



Tickets Now on Sale: Feherty Live from Minneapolis

Emmy-nominated television personality David Feherty will host back-to-back nights of Feherty Live stage shows, originating from the State Theatre in downtown Minneapolis, Thursday-Friday, Feb. 1-2. Airing live on Golf Channel at 8 p.m. ET (7 p.m. CT) each night, the shows will complement NBC Sports Group’s weeklong coverage of the Super Bowl taking place at U.S. Bank Stadium, just a few blocks from the State Theatre.

Tickets for those interested in attending either night can be purchased by visiting: https://www.ticketmaster.com/venueartist/49293/2053594

This will be the seventh installment of the Feherty Live franchise, and the third time that the shows will take place in conjunction with Super Bowl week (2012 – Indianapolis; 2015 – Glendale, Ariz.) Previous editions of Feherty Live have featured prominent guests, including American sporting icons, Michael Jordan, Michael Phelps (both of whom took part in Feherty Live in 2012) along with Al Michaels and Mike Eruzione, among others.

Host of his self-titled, Emmy-nominated Feherty series on Golf Channel, Feherty’s all-star lineup of golf-enthused guests feature celebrities from across entertainment, sports and politics. To date, Feherty has sat down with four U.S. Presidents (Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama and Donald Trump); sports legends Charles Barkley, Nick Saban, Stephen Curry and Bobby Knight; Hollywood icons Matthew McConaughey, Larry David and Samuel L. Jackson; and a host of golfing greats spanning Jack Nicklaus, Lee Trevino, Tom Watson, Annika Sorenstam and Phil Mickelson.

Feherty is coming off record viewership in 2017 for the 7th season of his Fehertyseries on Golf Channel, as the most-watched season to date for both Live+Same Day and Live+3 Days for premiere episodes.

Described as “golf’s iconoclast,” by Rolling Stone, and “the last unscripted man on TV,” by Men’s Journal, Feherty has made a name for himself not only through his self-titled series, but as one of the most irrepressible personalities calling golf over the past two decades. Beyond golf, Feherty continues to capture new and broader audiences with his wit and self-deprecating nature. A native of Northern Ireland and a former professional golfer who claimed 10 worldwide victories and a spot on the 1991 European Ryder Cup team, Feherty is now a proud American citizen who has risen above a history of alcoholism and addiction to become an Emmy-nominated television host, New York Times best-selling author and comedic relief for thousands of men and women in uniform.