Miami – November 7, 2017 – Telemundo Deportes today announced seven exclusive Spanish-language live NFL game telecasts on Universo beginning this Thursday, November 9 with Seahawks at Cardinals on “Thursday Night Football presented by Bud Light”, and culminating with Super Bowl LII live on Universo on Sunday, February 4, 2018, from U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

This presentation marks the fourth consecutive season Universo (previously Mun2) will televise NFL games, and the second consecutive NBC Super Bowl with the exclusive offering (Super Bowl XLIX in 2015). Prior to Super Bowl LII, Universo will air three of NBC’s “Thursday Night Football” games, NBC’s annual Thanksgiving night game, and NBC’s two NFL Playoff games. Coverage begins this Thursday, November 9 when the Arizona Cardinals host the Seattle Seahawks, live at 8 p.m. ET.

Universo’s telecasts will also be streamed live via the Telemundo Deportes En Vivo app and TelemundoDeportes.com. Telemundo digital platforms will also stream additional games in Spanish, including all of NBC’s remaining “Thursday Night Football” and “Sunday Night Football” games, featuring the SAP offering. Streaming will be available on desktops, tablets and connected TVs.

"We are thrilled to again present NFL regular-season and playoff games, including the Super Bowl, on Universo to the growing Hispanic football audience,” said Ray Warren, president of Telemundo Deportes. “Combined with the FIFA World Cup next year, the Spanish-language telecast of these high-profile NFL games, including the Super Bowl, reinforces Telemundo Deportes' commitment to bring the top global sports events in Spanish-language television and digital platforms to our diverse sports audience.”

The November 9 game kicks off Universo’s four consecutive Thursdays with primetime NFL games, and is followed by Tennessee Titans-Pittsburgh Steelers on Nov. 16; the New York Giants visiting the Washington Redskins on Thanksgiving night; and the Dallas Cowboys hosting Washington on Nov. 30. Universo coverage will continue with two NFL Playoff games in January and Super Bowl LII.

Telemundo Deportes’ commentators Edgar Lopez and Rene Giraldo return to call the NFL on Universo, alongside Veronica Contreras as sideline reporter. In addition, Miguel Gurwitz will host the telecasts with pre/postgame studio coverage. The games will be complemented by NFL content across Telemundo Deportes platforms, including highlights, features and specials.

Telemundo Deportes, one of the leading providers of sports content in Spanish in the United States, is home to two of the world's most popular sporting events: the FIFA World Cup™ through 2026 and the Summer Olympic Games through 2032. In addition, Telemundo Deportes broadcasts the FIFA World Cup™ CONCACAF qualifying matches for most of the region, including the Mexico and USA national teams’ away matches and the Premier League. Telemundo Deportes is also home to “Boxeo Telemundo Ford,” the #1 boxing program in Spanish, and “Titulares y Más,” the #1 sports news, entertainment and commentary show in Spanish, among other recognized sports properties.

##