– Dial Global to Continue as the NFL’s Exclusive Network Radio Partner –

New York, NY — September 19, 2012 — The National Football League (NFL) and Dial Global, Inc. (NASDAQ: DIAL) today announced a new multi-year agreement for Dial Global to continue as the exclusive network radio partner of the NFL. Dial Global has been an NFL network radio partner for more than four decades and the exclusive network radio partner since 1987.

Dial Global Sports’ coverage of the NFL airs on more than 500 stations around the country, bringing extraordinary content to football fans nationwide and providing integrated branding and promotional opportunities for advertisers across multiple platforms. Dial Global’s NFL broadcasts can also be heard in their entirety on SiriusXM Satellite Radio, NFL.com/Audiopass, and the NFL Mobile App available to Verizon Wireless subscribers.

“We are excited to extend our longstanding partnership with the NFL through the Super Bowl to be played at the end of the 2017 season,” said Dial Global Co-CEOs Spencer Brown and David Landau. “The NFL prime time broadcasts generate a huge audience that brings great value to our advertising clients and affiliate partners, furthering Dial Global’s goal of producing and distributing the best live sports audio in media.”

“We are excited to continue partnering with Dial Global to offer our fans NFL play-by-play radio broadcasts,” said NFL Senior Vice President of Broadcasting and Media Operations Howard Katz. “With Dial Global’s national affiliate base, every fan across the country will have access to all primetime and Thanksgiving games.”

The Dial Global Sports 2012 NFL broadcast schedule features 63 national games, including: the Opening Kickoff game, 16 Monday Night games, including one doubleheader, 17 Sunday Night games, 14 Thursday Night games (including Thanksgiving Night), one Saturday Night game, the Thanksgiving Day doubleheader, 12 Postseason games, including the AFC and NFC Championship Games, the AFC-NFC Pro Bowl and Super Bowl XLVII in New Orleans. Dial Global Sports also delivers specialty programs, including: The NFL Today, NFL Preview, NFL Insider, and NFL Sunday.

In addition to the 63-game national package, Dial Global Sports offers a weekly Sunday doubleheader throughout the regular season, chosen as the season progresses to ensure the best possible matchups. All stations airing Dial Global Sports’ NFL Football coverage can be found using the Station Finder located at dialglobalsports.com.

About Dial Global

Dial Global (NASDAQ: DIAL) Defines Great Moments in sports, news and entertainment through its radio networks which are heard by over 225 million listeners a week. As America’s leading provider and distributor of audio content to more than 8,500 radio stations nationwide, Dial Global produces over 200 news, sports, talk, music and entertainment programs, services and digital applications, jingles and imaging. Dial Global Sports is home to some of the most exciting sports broadcasts on radio, including NFL football–featuring the regular season, the playoffs and the Super Bowl–as well as NCAA Football and Basketball, including “March Madness” and the Final Four; the Masters and the Olympics. Dial Global has been the NFL network radio rights holder since 1987. Dial Global also recently launched NBC Sports Radio in conjunction with the NBC Sports Group. For more information, visit dialglobal.com.