CLOSE Martin Frank's 4-down territory for the Eagles-Patriots in the Super Bowl, with prediction. Wochit

Philadelphia Eagles' Nick Foles catches a touchdown pass during the first half of the NFL Super Bowl 52 football game against the New England Patriots Sunday, Feb. 4, 2018, in Minneapolis. (AP Photo/Jeff Roberson) (Photo: The Associated Press)

MINNEAPOLIS — FINAL: EAGLES 41, PATRIOTS 33

Rejoice, Philadelphia, your first Super Bowl victory came at the expense of the greatest quarterback in NFL history and the only league dynasty we've seen in the 21st century. The Eagles' 57-year title drought is also over, and the party in the City of Brotherly Love may never end, either.

The task

Ninety yards, 58 seconds left for New England.

EAGLES 41, PATRIOTS 33

Jake Elliott's 46-yard field goal pushes the lead to eight ... of course the Eagles could/should be up by two scores after those failed two-point tries. Pats have no timeouts, 65 seconds to go.

Defense wins championships?

After doing almost nothing all day, the Eagles defense may have just won Philadelphia's first Lombardi Trophy. DE Brandon Graham's strip of Brady is recovered by DE Derek Barnett in New England territory, a massive play on the game's first sack.

EAGLES 38, PATRIOTS 33

Foles strikes back with 2:21 left as Zach Ertz dives into the end zone with an 11-yard go-ahead TD, that survived the review. Another two-point play failed, keeping Philly's edge at five points. The stage is set for another epic New England comeback and another record for Brady, who needs 10 yards to surpass last year's mark of 466.

Chung down

Pats S Patrick Chung is down again. He re-entered the game earlier this half after being trucked by Jay Ajayi.

Official attendance

67,612 ... maybe 60K for Philly.

PATRIOTS 33, EAGLES 32

Gronk scores his second TD of the second half on Brady's third scoring strike of the night. New England now has its first lead. Fair or not, that failed Eagles two-point play in the first half is sure to cause second guessing for at least the next few minutes.

Neither QB has been sacked ...

... in case you were wondering about this track meet. We've now blown past 1,000 combined yards.

Eli and Odell

The Manning/Beckham Dirty Dancing commercial was a big hit inside U.S. Bank Stadium, too. READ MORE

EAGLES 32, PATRIOTS 26

Jake Elliott's 42-yard field goal puts Philly up by six. But given how Brady is playing, trading FGs for TDs in fourth quarter of a Super Bowl could be deadly.

New record

The previous record for combined Super Bowl yards was 929 (Redskins-Broncos, 1988, Super Bowl XXII). We've already blown by that in under three full quarters.

Chung returns

Patriots S Patrick Chung is back in the game after getting checked for an injury earlier in the half. He absorbed what seemed to be a brutal blow to the helmet from Jay Ajayi.

END OF THIRD QUARTER: EAGLES 29, PATRIOTS 26

Can Pats pull off another Super comeback?

EAGLES 29, PATRIOTS 26

Is this a game between teams playing seven-on-seven? Brady just capped another 75-yard drive with a 26-yard TD pass to former lacrosse player Chris Hogan. Brady needed overtime to throw for a Super Bowl record 466 yards last year. He's 63 yards shy of breaking that, and we're only in the third quarter.

Kicking woes

You'd think this game was being played in sub-zero temps. READ MORE

EAGLES 29, PATRIOTS 19

Foles and RB Corey Clement didn't figure much in Philly's 2017 plans, but the backup QB just hit the undrafted rookie for a 22-yard TD that stood up under review as Clement's white cleat apparently didn't cross the end zone's back line.

Blount force trauma

Eagles RB LeGarrette Blount lost quite a few touches to Jay Ajayi after his midseason trade from Miami. But Blount is bludgeoning his old mates today, carrying seven times for a game-high 77 rushing yards.

The Patriots have not punted

FYI. That kind of game.

EAGLES 22, PATRIOTS 19

Is Bill Belichick listening to us? After Rob Gronkowski caught one pass for 9 yards in the first half (read below), he snags four balls for 68 yards on the opening drive of the second half, finishing the eight-play, 75-yard march off with a 5-yard TD grab.

Second half under way ...

... and in case you missed the first 30 minutes. READ MORE

Timberlake

JT's halftime show in PHOTOS.

Super feat

Eagles QB Nick Foles makes Super Bowl history with TD catch. READ MORE

Where's Gronk?

Philly's D has done a nice job shackling Brady's primary weapon. TE Rob Gronkowski has been targeted five times but managed just one 9-yard reception.

HALFTIME: EAGLES 22, PATRIOTS 12

What a half. The underdog Eagles go to the locker room up 10 after two action-packed quarters that saw both quarterbacks targeted on passes. The teams have combined for 673 total yards and both have surpassed 300 already (Patriots 350, Eagles 323).

EAGLES 22, PATRIOTS 12

Credit Pederson for this gamble as TE Trey Burton's 1-yard TD pass to wide-open Foles in the end zone flat on fourth-and-goal averts the criticism that surely would have come the coach's way had he left more points on the board. What a call. And Foles clearly has better hands than Brady.

Feed James White

White now has seven TDs in his last four postseason games. We really enjoyed talking to him this week. READ MORE

EAGLES 15, PATRIOTS 12

Last year's unsung Super Bowl hero, Pats RB James White, takes it to the house from 26 yards. But another missed PAT, this time by Gostkowski, means the Eagles' failed two-point gamble won't haunt them.

TURNOVER

Any time the Patriots are in the Super Bowl, a logic-defying "catch" is bound to happen. This time it's New England S Duron Harmon gathering the INT off a deflected throw off Jeffery. David Tyree, Mario Manningham, Jermaine Kearse and Julian Edelman all just raised a glass. Pats take over on their own 10.

EAGLES 15, PATRIOTS 6

The Patriots cut the lead to nine after Gostkowski's 45-yard field goal was set up by Rex Burkhead's 46-yard catch-and-run. Only one punt today.

EAGLES 15, PATRIOTS 3

After Blount set up Jeffery on the previous TD, Jeffery returns the favor, his acrobatic 22-yard reception setting up Blount's 21-yard TD rumble on the next play. Have to question Pederson for opting for a (failed) two-point attempt this early.

Cooks out

Patriots WR Brandin Cooks has been ruled out. Look for speedy Phillip Dorsett to replicate Cooks' role as an outside deep threat. READ MORE

Oops

You'll recall Tom Brady's wife, Gisele Bundchen, was not happy when his receivers dropped key passes in Super Bowl XLVI. Be nice to know what Danny Amendola's girlfriend (and Bundchen) said after Brady dropped the ball on that razzle-dazzle play. New England turned the ball over on downs on the following play.

Big hit on Cooks

Patriots WR Brandin Cooks, playing in his first Super Bowl, has walked to the sideline after absorbing a brutal hit to his helmet from Eagles S Malcolm Jenkins after a 23-yard gain. Cooks is New England's deep threat and is nearly as good at drawing interference penalties as breaking off big gainers. Big loss if he can't return.

Third phase blues

An eight-play, 74-yard Patriots drive goes for naught as issues persist in the kicking game. A bad snap from Joe Cardona threw off Gostkowski's timing, and his 26-yard FG attempt hit the left upright after he took a false step amid the late hold.

END OF FIRST QUARTER: EAGLES 9, PATRIOTS 3

A frenetic opening period saw the teams combine for 12 points and 287 yards. Looks like an offensive barnburner to counter Minnesota's freezing temperatures.

Haunting ex-mates?

Philly's TD was set up by RB LeGarrette Blount's 36-yard run. Blount and DE Chris Long, who were Patriots last year, are trying to become the first players since Deion Sanders in Super Bowls XXIX and XXX (1994 and '95 seasons) to win consecutive Super Bowls while playing for different teams.

EAGLES 9, PATRIOTS 3

Replicating what we saw in the NFC Championship Game, Eagles coach Doug Pederson and QB Nick Foles are showing complete willingness to attack downfield. This time, Foles found Alshon Jeffery for a 34-yard TD to reclaim the lead, though Elliott missed the PAT wide right.

EAGLES 3, PATRIOTS 3

New England kicker Stephen Gostkowski matches fellow Memphis alum Jake Elliott, drilling a 26-yard FG to tie the game. The Patriots went 67 yards in nine plays, with Tom Brady passing for 58 and producing the first batch of first-quarter points in his Super Bowl career.

Hex about to end?

In the seven Super Bowls during the Brady/Belichick era, the Patriots have never scored in the first quarter. It appears that streak is about to end.

How much?

Thirty bucks for a soda? Super Bowl stadium is full of sky-high concession prices. READ MORE

Eagles fans take over

Super Bowl LII seems like a virtual home game for Philadelphia. READ MORE

EAGLES 3, PATRIOTS 0

Jake Elliotto's 25-yard field goal caps a promising opening drive for the Eagles. Nick Foles, whose 122.1 QB rating leads all postseason passers, opens the game by completing six of nine throws for 61 yards but couldn't connect in the red zone.