Mehmet Mutlu was not the brightest of boys – likeable enough, but with little interest in learning. There was a sense of inevitability for his teacher when he learnt, last month, that his 16-year-old pupil had been killed in clashes between Kurdish youths and Turkish security forces.

But it was still a shock. “He was lying on the ground, his face in a pool of blood,” he recalled with sadness. “He was my student.”

For 30 years the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) has engaged in armed struggle against the Turkish state. Now the collapse of a ceasefire last summer has plunged the mainly Kurdish south-east of the country into the bloodiest bout of violence since the 1990s.

With a struggling economy, a population of more than two million Syrian refugees and a volatile border with Syria and Iraq, Turkey can ill afford a long-running internal conflict. Yet its litany of death shows no sign of ending; on Tuesday, three policemen were killed and four more were wounded in a suspected PKK attack in the province of Sirnak.

While previous flare-ups were characterised by tit-for-tat strikes on Turkish army posts and PKK training camps, much of the fighting is now taking place in cities. These urban clashes are being fought by teenagers and 20-somethings under the banner of the recently formed Patriotic Revolutionary Youth Movement.

Demonstrations against the curfew in the Sur district in Diyarbakir ended in clashes with the police (Corbis)

Announced in February 2013, shortly before the PKK declared a ceasefire, its stated aims included tackling drugs and prostitution as well as protecting communities from what it termed “the tyranny and persecution” of the police.

Known by the initials YDG-H, the youth movement has formed armed branches across the south-east. When the conflict reignited last July, its members dug trenches among homes and shops and threw up barricades. It declared “autonomous zones”, daring the state to force it out.

Mehmet Mutlu’s story is typical of the tales told by friends, relatives and neighbours of the children of the 1990s who are fighting street to street in the Sur district of Diyarbakir.

Mehmet’s teacher, who asked for his name and subject to be withheld for fear of losing his job, said that his pupil’s father was imprisoned for about 14 years “for political reasons”. His older brother, he said, had gone to fight in Rojava, the Kurds’ name for the territory they hold in northern Syria. “This kind of child, whose dad was in prison for 13, 14 years, they have a feeling of hate towards those who did this,” he said.

Chain smoking as he spoke, the teacher, whose school is in the middle of the embattled Sur area, painted a picture of classrooms filled with poor but politicised students. The south-east has unemployment rates of up to 24 per cent and after-school jobs left little time to study, he said. Having grown up using Kurdish at home, many spoke poor, accented Turkish.

World news in pictures







50 show all World news in pictures

































































































1/50 31 March 2018 Mourners hold back a relative of Palestinian Hamdan Abu Amshah, who was killed along the Israel border with Gaza, during his funeral in Beit Hanoun town. Reuters

2/50 30 March 2018 Israeli soldiers shot tear gas grenades towards the Palestinian tent city protest commemorating Land Day. The day marks the killing of six Arab Israelis during 1976 demonstrations against Israeli confiscations of Arab land. AFP/Getty

3/50 29 March 2018 An emotional Steve Smith is comforted by his father Peter as he fronts the media at Sydney International Airport. Steve Smith, David Warner and Cameron Bancroft were flown back to Australia following investigations into alleged ball tampering in South Africa. Getty

4/50 28 March 2018 French gendarmes escort the coffin of the late Lieutenant Colonel Arnaud Beltrame transported by car during a funeral procession leaving the Pantheon as part of a national tribute in Paris. The French President will lead a national commemoration to hostage-swap policeman Arnaud Beltrame killed in jihadist attack. AFP/Getty

5/50 27 March 2018 Russian President Vladimir Putin visits a memorial made for the victims of a fire in a multi-story shopping center in the Siberian city of Kemerovo. Officials say that the fire escapes were blocked and a PA system was turned off during the fire that killed over 50 people. Kremlin Pool Photo via AP

6/50 26 March 2018 At least 64 shoppers have been killed in fire at a shopping centre in Russia. A further 16 people were still missing after flames broke out at the four-storey Winter Cherry mall in the city of Kemerovo in Siberia, according to Russian Emergencies Minister Vladimir Puchkov. The fire was extinguished in the morning after burning through the night. Parts of the building were still smouldering and the floors of the cinema hall had caved in in places, another emergency official said. Russian Emergencies Ministry via Reuters

7/50 25 March 2018 Syrian civilians gathering for their evacuation from the town of Arbin in the Eastern Ghouta region on the outskirts of the capital Damascus, following a deal with the regime. The deal is expected to see some 7,000 people bussed from Arbin and Zamalka towns and the district of Jobar to a rebel-dominated part of northern Syria. AFP/Getty

8/50 24 March 2018 Students attend the ‘March For Our Lives’ in Washington. In the wake of the Florida attack, there has been a widespread effort to ban assault rifle. Getty

9/50 23 March 2018 Police at the scene of a hostage situation in a supermarket in Trebes. An armed man took hostages in a supermarket in southern France, killing three and injuring about a dozen others, police said. A French minister confirmed the gunman had been shot dead by police. Reuters

10/50 22 March 2018 A boy rows his boat in the polluted waters of the Brahmaputra river on World Water Day in Guwahati, India. Reuters

11/50 21 March 2018 Kosovo's opposition lawmakers release a teargas canister inside the country's parliament in before a vote for an agreement to ratify or not a border demarcation deal signed in 2015 with Montenegro. AFP/Getty

12/50 20 March 2018 People carrying luggage leave the Russian Embassy in London and board a van bearing diplomatic plates. Dozens of people including adults with children arrived at the Russian embassy in the morning and then left carrying luggage in vehicles bearing diplomatic registration plates. Britain last week announced the expulsion of 23 Russian diplomats over the spy poisoning row, prompting a tit-for-tat response from Moscow. AFP/Getty

13/50 19 March 2018 The Soyuz MS-08 spacecraft is mounted on the launch pad at the Russian-leased Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan AFP/Getty

14/50 18 March 2018 President Vladimir Putin walks out of a voting booth at a polling station during Russia's presidential election in Moscow. AFP/Getty

15/50 17 March 2018 People take part in a pensioners protest to demand decent pensions in Barcelona. Thousands of people across the country took part in mass demonstrations called by main Spanish workers unions demanding rises of state pensions in accordance with the consumer price index AFP/Getty

16/50 16 March 2018 Russian President Vladimir Putin visits the Almazov National Medical Research Centre in Saint Petersburg. AFP/Getty

17/50 15 March 2018 Vladimir Putin chairs a meeting with members of the Security Council in Moscow. Reuters

18/50 14 March 2018 German Chancellor Angela Merkel is sworn in by the President of the German lower house during the government's swearing-in ceremony at the Bundestag in Berlin. Merkel, head of the Christian Democratic Party CDU, starts her fourth term as German chancellor, capping months of political uncertainty as she bartered with her rivals of the SPD to help govern Europe's top economy in a "grand coalition". AFP/Getty

19/50 13 March 2018 Nepali students of University of Dhaka light candles in memory of the victims of the US-Bangla aircraft crash in Nepal, Bangladesh. Reuters

20/50 12 March 2018 Rescuers work to save passengers from a plane crash at Kathmandu airport in Nepal. AP

21/50 11 March 2018 French President Emmanuel Macron and his wife Brigitte Macron pose for photographs as they visit the Taj Mahal. AFP/Getty

22/50 10 March 2018 France’s far-right party Front National (FN) president Marine Le Pen applauds former US President advisor Steve Bannon after his speech during the Front National party annual congress, in Lille, northern France. AFP/Getty

23/50 9 March 2018 A television screen showing pictures of US President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un at a railway station in Seoul. AFP/Getty

24/50 8 March 2018 Protesters form triangles with their hands during a demonstration for women’s rights in Bilbao, Spain. Reuters

25/50 7 March 2018 A labourer works on a salt pan in the outskirts of the Nagaur district in the Indian state of Rajasthan ahead of International Women’s day. AFP/Getty

26/50 6 March 2018 Sri Lanka's army soldiers and police personnel stand near a vandalised building in Digana, a suburb of Kandy. Extremists Buddhist mobs swept through the town on Monday, burning at least 11 Muslim owned shops and homes. Sri Lanka's president declared a state of emergency Tuesday amid fears that anti-Muslim attacks in the central hill town could spread. AP

27/50 5 March 2018 Chinese President Xi Jinping arrives for the opening of the first session of the 13th National People's Congress (NPC) at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. The NPC has over 3,000 delegates and is the world's largest parliament or legislative assembly though its function is largely as a formal seal of approval for the policies fixed by the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party. The NPC runs alongside the annual plenary meetings of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), together known as 'Lianghui' or 'Two Meetings'. EPA

28/50 4 March 2018 Female protestor stands up with the words 'Berlusconi Sei Scaduto' written on her body, translating as 'Berlusconi, you’ve expired', as Silvio Berlusconi stands during voting of the political and regional elections in Milan, Italy. Rex

29/50 3 March 2018 Russian President Vladimir Putin delivers a speech during a rally to support his bid in the upcoming presidential election at Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow. Reuters

30/50 2 March 2018 A light turns red outside of Germany's Krupp Mannesmann steel factory. German officials and industry groups warned U.S. President Donald Trump that he risks sparking a trade war with his closest allies if he goes ahead with plans to impose steep tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. AP

31/50 1 March 2018 People dance during Holi festival celebrations in Kathmandu, Nepal. EPA

32/50 28 February 2018 Indian fans watch as the funeral procession of the late Bollywood actress Sridevi Kapoor passes through Mumbai. AFP/Getty

33/50 27 February 2018 Candles are left in tribute to murdered Slovakian investigative reporter Jan Kuciak, 27, and his fiancee Martina, 27, at Slovak National Uprising Square in Bratislava. A leading Slovak newspaper says organised crime may have been involved in the shooting death that shocked Slovakia. The bodies of Kuciak and Kusnirova were found Sunday evening in their house in the town of Velka Maca, east of the capital. AP

34/50 26 February 2018 Colosseum during a heavy snowfall in Rome, Italy. REUTERS/Alberto Lingria

35/50 25 February 2018 Family members of victims of the sunken South Korean naval ship Cheonan by a North Korean attack hold up defaced portraits of Kim Yong Chol, vice chairman of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party Central Committee, during a rally against his visit near the Unification bridge in Paju, South Korea. A North Korean high-level delegation led by Kim arrived to attend the closing ceremony of the Pyeongchang Winter Olympics. The signs read: " Let's punish Kim Young Chol." Getty

36/50 24 February 2018 Ivanka Trump (C) cheers while sat between former Olympic US bobsledders Shauna Rohbock (L) and Valerie Fleming (R) as the United States beat Sweden in their Men's Gold Medal Curling match at the Gangneung Curling Centre in Gangneung, South Korea. Ivanka Trump is on a four-day visit to South Korea to attend the closing ceremony of the PyeongChang Winter Olympics. Getty

37/50 23 February 2018 David Allen Turpin (C), who along with Louise Anna Turpin is accused of abusing and holding 13 of their children captive, appears in court with attorneys David Macher (L) and Alison Lowe in court in Riverside, California. According to Riverside County Sheriffs, David Allen Turpin and Louise Anna Turpin held 13 malnourished children ranging in age from 2 to 29 captive in their Perris, California home. Deputies were alerted after a 17-year-old daughter escaped by jumping through a window shortly before dawn, carrying a de-activated mobile phone from which she was able to call 911 for help. Responding deputies described conditions in the home as foul-smelling with some kids chained to a bed and suffering injuries as a result. Adult children appeared at first to be minors because of their malnourished state. The Turpins were arrested on charges of torture and child endangerment. Getty

38/50 22 February 2018 The Elephanta Island, home to the famous Elephanta Caves, finally gets electricity after a wait of 70 years. Seventy years after Independence, a 7.5-km long undersea cable has finally brought electricity to the world-famous Gharapuri Isle, which houses the UNESCO World Heritage site Elephanta Caves, about 10-km from Mumbai, India. Getty

39/50 21 February 2018 Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau pays his respects at the Sikh Golden Temple in Amritsar. Trudeau and his family are on a week-long official trip to India. Getty

40/50 20 February 2018 Members of the Syrian civil defence evacuate an injured civilian on a stretcher from an area hit by a reported regime air strike in the rebel-held town of Saqba, in the besieged Eastern Ghouta region on the outskirts of the capital Damascus. AFP/Getty

41/50 19 February 2018 A Thai Navy instructor demonstrates how to catch a snake during a jungle survival exercise as part of the "Cobra Gold 2018" (CG18) joint military exercise with US soldiers, at a military base in Chonburi province, Thailand. Reuters

42/50 18 February 2018 Children play outside their destroyed school in the Frikeh village, in Idlib, north-western Syria

43/50 17 February 2018 A pro-Kurd demonstrator attends a protest demanding the release of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Ocalan in Strasbourg, France

44/50 16 February 2018 Joe Zevuloni mourns in front of a cross placed in a park to commemorate the victims of the shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, in Parkland, Florida Reuters

45/50 15 February 2018 South Africa's new president Cyril Ramaphosa holds up his right hand as he is sworn into office AFP/Getty

46/50 14 February 2018 The African National Congress’s (ANC) treasurer general Paul Mashatile (left) and parliamentary chief whip Jackson Mthembu address a media briefing, after an emergency ANC caucus meeting on 14 February in Cape Town. South Africa’s parliament will hold a vote of no-confidence in President Jacob Zuma on 15 February, the ruling ANC party said, signalling its determination to eject him from office after days of stalemate AFP

47/50 13 February 2018 North Korean cheerleaders are surrounded by media as they attempt to walk on Gyeongpo beach in Gangneung, South Korea AFP/Getty

48/50 12 February 2018 Former US President Barack Obama unveils his portrait at the Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery in Washington, DC AFP/Getty

49/50 9 February 2018 US Vice President Mike Pence and North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un's sister Kim Yo-Jong attend the opening ceremony of the Pyeongchang 2018 Winter Olympic Games AFP/Getty

50/50 8 February 2018 Bangladesh police charge towards activists of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party protesting following a verdict against opposition leader Khaleda Zia in Dhaka. The ex-Prime Minister of Bangladesh was jailed for five years on corruption charges. AFP/Getty

Despite some reforms by the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), many students felt alienated, the teacher claimed, by an educational system that denied them their distinct ethnic and cultural identity. “On Monday and Friday we have to sing the national anthem and... most of them don’t sing it,” he said. “We play it, but they don’t sing. When it’s not loud enough, they have to do it again.

Many young people have spent spells in prison for hurling stones or Molotov cocktails. Mesut Simeksek, 25, who was killed in December, served three years in jail before joining the fighting in Diyarbakir, according to his older sister, Guler Sevikek.

Their family took refuge in Sur after fleeing the small town of Lice in the 1990s. Like Mehmet, Mesut had a brother fighting in Syria and was traumatised by the state’s treatment of his father and brother. His sister recalled: “They were forced to lie on the street and were surrounded by dogs. Mesut used to say: ‘How can I ever forget that image?’”

Those fighting in Diyarbakir are no angels. Mesut’s sister admits that he was armed, though she disputes claims by pro-government media that he was among the most dangerous terrorists in Diyarbakir. Mehmet’s teacher, too, believes he carried a weapon, though he is alarmed by claims on pro-Kurdish news sites that Mehmet was shot while his hands were cuffed behind his back.

The decision by these young men to fight in urban areas has forced thousands of families to flee their homes and left others trapped. Ahmad Yasar, a father of seven who runs a restaurant just inside the old city walls, was part of a delegation that pleaded with them not to entrench themselves in the middle of their city. “A group of us, shopkeepers and tradesmen, went to those streets and said: this is wrong,” he said. “Of course they didn’t listen to us. They didn’t care what we said.”

But there is also sympathy for their circumstances. Umit, an artist whose old basalt house has been damaged by the clashes, said that the youths had no other prospects. “Those streets are the only thing in their hands,” he said. “It’s about their very existence.”

Though it supports the PKK’s stated aim of greater Kurdish autonomy, it is unclear to what extent the YDG-H youth movement is controlled by older, more established insurgents.

Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the main opposition leader, is accused of “openly insulting the President” (AFP)

In November, the PKK leader Cemil Bayik denied that the two organisations were linked. But, just months before the group was formed, Murat Karayilan, head of a PKK umbrella group, called for a “youth revolution” against state policies in the south-east.

Bill Park, a visiting scholar at Tobb Etu University in Ankara, said that, while “nothing happens in the south-east without the PKK”, the youth campaign appeared to be at least partly “improvised”. He added: “I’m sure that the PKK is not in full control.”

The agenda for a meeting between David Cameron and his Turkish counterpart Ahmet Davutoglu was due to include Turkey’s role in the battle against Isis and efforts to stem the refugee crisis. Given the scale of those two tasks alone, Britain and Turkey’s other Western allies are anxious for the Kurdish conflict to be halted as soon as possible.

The stories told on the streets of Diyarbakir offer worrying signs about the prospects for long-lasting peace. “Our generation is the one that you can talk with, hold negotiations with,” said Mr Yasar, the weary restaurant owner. “This new generation is more radical. They feel that they have no link with this country.”

Party leader faces jail for ‘dictator’ comment

Lawyers for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan have filed a lawsuit against Turkey’s main opposition leader, Kemal Kilicdaroglu, for calling Mr Erdogan a dictator.

Mr Kilicdaroglu is accused of “openly insulting the President”, an offence punishable by four years in prison, after defending a group of academics who face investigation after criticising Mr Erdogan’s military action in mainly Kurdish areas.

“Academics who express their opinions have been detained one by one on instructions given by a so-called dictator,” said the Republican People’s Party leader.

Reuters