Mr. Erdogan called on Mr. Chomsky and other scholars to visit southeastern Turkey to get a “true picture” of the events taking place there.

“They should see with their eyes whether the problem is a violation by the state or the hijacking of our citizens’ rights and freedoms by the terrorist organization,” he said, referring to the Kurdistan Workers’ Party. On Thursday, the government formally began an investigation of the scholars.

No details were available about the investigation, but if it leads to a trial the academics could face one to five years in jail if convicted.

The detentions have deepened concerns over freedom of expression in Turkey under Mr. Erdogan’s leadership, and analysts say that the latest crackdown on academics is intended to muzzle debate and to curb academic freedoms.

“The campaign against academics this week certainly targets a new group and has very serious consequences for academic freedom in Turkey, as well as free speech,” said Emma Sinclair-Webb, a senior Turkey researcher at Human Rights Watch. “There are concerns for the physical safety of some academics in provincial universities after being targeted in such a way.”

(The petition has even drawn criticism from a notorious organized-crime boss, Sedat Peker, who is known for his nationalist viewpoints. “We will spill your blood, and we will take shower with your blood,” he said in a statement on his website.)

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Several scholars, reached by telephone on Friday, declined to comment on the detentions for fear of reprisal. But many of them said they stood by their signatures.

“Freedom of expression was already very limited in Turkey,” said Esra Ozyurek, chairwoman of Contemporary Turkish Studies at the London School of Economics, who signed the petition. “It is very difficult to find a venue for oppositional voices, and as we see voicing dissent comes with a very high price. Even demanding peace is easily criminalized.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Ozyurek said that she expected that she and others who signed the petition would face similar charges.

Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, a political scientist and former university professor, also lashed out at the scholars who signed the petition.

“Being an intellectual and defending democracy is first of all possible by defending democratic methods,” Mr. Davutoglu said. “Why are you aligning behind this terrorist organization?”

The United States ambassador to Turkey, John R. Bass, criticized the arrests, saying they would have a “chilling effect on legitimate political discourse” about the violence in southeastern Turkey.

“In democratic societies, it is imperative that citizens have the opportunity to express their views, even controversial or unpopular ones,” he said in a statement on Twitter. “Expressions of concern about violence do not equal support for terrorism. Criticism of government does not equal treason.”

Violence has surged in Turkey’s volatile southeast since the renewal of a decades-old conflict between Kurdish militants and the Turkish state that has claimed more than 40,000 lives.

The Turkish military started a major counterinsurgency campaign last month, imposing round-the-clock curfews in Kurdish areas to drive Kurdish militants out of their strongholds. Rights groups say that nearly 200 civilians have been killed in the violence.