Two Turkish police officers have been found dead, shot in the head, in an attack close to the Syrian border claimed by the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).

The PKK's military wing claimed responsibility for the attack in the south-eastern part of the city of Sanliurfa, and said they killed the officers to avenge the suicide bombing on Monday blamed on Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil).

In a statement, the People's Defence Forces (HPG) accused the officers of cooperating with Isil: "Today around 6am, a revenge operation was carried against two policemen collaborating with daesh in Serêkaniyê North (Ceylanpınar/Urfa)," using the Arabic acronym for Isil.

The statement goes on to name the policemen killed and said "their weapons/ID documents were seized by an Apocî team".

The incident comes two days after a suicide bomb attack killed 32 activists in nearby Suruc , raising fears of a spillover of the Syrian conflict into Turkey.

Turkish authorities have said they believe the suicide bomber responsible for the attack was a young man recently lured into joining Isil.

On Wednesday, a Turkish official said DNA testing had confirmed that a 20-year-old Turkish man carried out the suicide bombing.

"As a result of DNA tests, we confirm that the assailant is a 20-year-old man registered in Adiyaman," the official told AFP on condition of anonymity, referring to a province in southeastern Turkey.

Authorities have promised to tighten border controls along the frontier with Syria.

Protests erupted in a dozen or so neighbourhoods in Istanbul late on Tuesday, as well as cities in the predominantly Kurdish southeast, after Monday's bombing.

Many of Turkey's Kurds and opposition supporters suspect Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish president, and the ruling AK Party of covertly backing Isil against Kurdish fighters in Syria, something the government has repeatedly denied.

"Murderer Islamic State, collaborator Erdogan and AKP" some of the protesters chanted as they marched down a major shopping avenue in Istanbul's Kadikoy neighhourhood, before police fired tear gas and water cannon when they refused to disperse.

There were also protests overnight in Ankara and other parts of Turkey, where demonstrators carried pictures of those killed in the Suruc attack as well as banners of the youth federation of which many of the victims were members.

Ahmet Davutoglu, the Turkish prime minister, on Tuesday rejected accusations that Turkey had tacitly supported Isil and had unwittingly opened the door to the bombing.

Access to Twitter has been blocked after a local court banned broadcast of footage from the Suruc bombing.