Six others also remanded on charges of aiding terrorist group PKK

ANKARA

Ten PKK terrorists were "neutralized" Tuesday in ongoing anti-terror operations in Turkey’s southeastern province of Sirnak, the local governorate announced.

"14 terrorists were neutralized for the past week in Cudi Mountain area," added the statement issued by the Sirnak Governor's office.

According to an statement by the Turkish General Staff, three PKK terrorists were "neutralized" during a conflict in Hozart district of eastern Tunceli province.



Two terrorists were "neutralized" in an air operation in Sirnak's suburbs, while five others killed with drone and three in clash with security forces in the same area.



Another terrorist was "neutralized" in Diyarbakir’s Silvan district.

Six suspects have been arrested in southeastern Batman province on charges of aiding and abetting PKK terrorists, according to the provincial gendarmerie command.

The suspects were later remanded in custody by Batman criminal court of peace.



In a separate operation, five terrorists were neutralized -- including a high-profile terrorist -- in southeastern Mardin's Buyukkardes neighborhood, after curfew was declared early Tuesday in a total of five neighborhoods, security sources said.

The slain high-profile terrorist, Hasan Turan, who went by the nickname Seyit Reso, was said to be in charge of the Mardin area for the PKK, the source, who spoke anonymously due to restrictions on talking to media, said.

Turan had a price of 300,000 Turkish liras put on his head and was also featured in "category grey" of Turkish Interior Ministry’s “wanted terrorists” list.

The Turkish Interior Ministry list has been divided in five color-coded categories, with red designated as the most wanted, followed by blue, green, orange and grey.

The PKK -- listed as a terrorist organization by Turkey, the U.S., and EU -- resumed its decades-old armed campaign in July last year. Since then, more than 300 civilians and nearly 800 security personnel have been martyred. Around 8,000 PKK terrorists have been killed or apprehended.