By TODAY’S ZAMAN WITH WIRES

Members of the terrorist Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) attacked a police station in the southeastern province of Diyarbakır on Wednesday evening with a truck bomb, killing six people, including an infant and two young children, and injuring 43 in one of the biggest strikes since the conflict reignited in late July 2015. The terrorists staged simultaneous attacks on the police station, a lodging house for family members of police officers and a district gen

Members of the terrorist Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) attacked a police station in the southeastern province of Diyarbakır on Wednesday evening with a truck bomb, killing six people, including an infant and two young children, and injuring 43 in one of the biggest strikes since the conflict reignited in late July 2015.

The terrorists staged simultaneous attacks on the police station, a lodging house for family members of police officers and a district gendarmerie command building in the Çınar district at around 11:30 p.m. on Wednesday, the Diyarbakır Governor’s Office said in a statement on Thursday.

The statement also said the terrorists attacked the police station via a truck loaded with explosives. Following the explosion, they opened fire on the police station, the lodging house and the command building via rockets and automatic weapons.

According to media reports, an intense clash erupted between the Turkish security forces and the PKK terrorists that lasted for nearly 40 minutes before the terrorists fled the scene.

Reports state that nearby windows were blown out, shop shutters were mangled and streets were covered in debris.

The Diyarbakır Governor’s Office established a crisis management desk following the attack. Soldiers, ambulances and firefighters were deployed to the scene immediately following the explosion, the governor’s office said on Thursday.

Teams from the Disaster and Emergency Management Directorate (AFAD) and the National Medical Rescue Team …read more

From:: TODAYS ZAMAN