Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has sharply criticized a group of Turkish academics for their call to end violence in Turkey's Southeast, accusing them of being a fifth column of foreign power destined to undermine Turkey's national security.

In a speech to Turkish ambassadors in Ankara, Erdoğan targeted a recent declaration signed by 1,128 academics from 89 universities in a call to end the ongoing fighting between security forces and militants of the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) that has inflicted devastation in some residential areas of several predominantly Kurdish-populated towns.

The declaration highlights the number of civilian deaths resulting from the violence in Turkey's Southeast and calls on the government to restore a peace process that was shelved in July. The declaration, whose signatories include famous academics such as David Harvey, Immanuel Wallerstein and Noam Chomksy, was read in Turkish and Kurdish at press conferences in İstanbul and Ankara on Monday.

The group of scholars, called Academicians for Peace, stated that it will not be party to the massacre continuing in the Southeast. They also claimed Turkey is violating international treaties it has previously committed to.

"Unfortunately these so-called academics claim that the state is carrying out a massacre. You, those so-called intellectuals! You are dark people. You are not intellectuals," Erdoğan went on a tirade against the group, claiming they wouldn't even know where the Southeast is located.

He accused them of acting as a fifth column of foreign powers. Erdoğan also slammed the international community for what he labelled its hypocritical stance in combatting terrorism.

"Despite all these facts, these academics release a statement, accusing the state. Not content with that, they also invite foreigners to our country to monitor developments. This is the mindset of a protectorate," Erdoğan said while lambasting the group members.

"Turkey experienced betrayal [at the hands of] this mindset 100 years ago. Then there was a group of so-called intellectuals who preferred the protectorate of a great power with the belief that only foreigners could fix the [problems] in this country," Erdoğan said in his criticism, echoing a nationalist reaction deeply entrenched in social codes of statesmen, similar to those in the past when state officials appealed with similar arguments to suppress any voice critical of state policies regarding crucial national security issues.

In a veiled threat, he even went on to claim that Turkey is facing treason, similar to that of 100 years ago, from those academics who are paid by the state and who possess state passports and enjoy better-than-average lives of relative prosperity.

Not long after Erdoğan's speech, Turkey's Higher Education Board (YÖK) said it would launch a disciplinary investigation into the signatories of the declaration, threatening to fire them.

Erdoğan also invited famous social scientists and intellectuals to observe what is going on in Turkey.

"Let the US Embassy in Ankara invite Chomsky to Turkey, let's host him in the [Kurdish] region. Let him see [the] facts [for] himself, not through those "so-called academics" who act as a fifth column," Erdoğan said.

The president also struck a defiant tone against criticism over the government's handling of the Kurdish conflict. He said there is a terrorism problem and signaled that the government will try to resolve the conflict after it has ended the PKK's presence in the Southeast, a task that has eluded the Turkish state for more than three decades.