Turkey invites UN to visit southeast amid claims of rights abusesANKARAAFP photoTurkey has offered an open invitation to U.N. agencies to visit the country’s southeastern provinces after reports of human rights violations allegedly committed by Turkish security forces in the region in the past few months, while Ankara has strictly refuted a statement by the top U.N. rights official that it has not responded positively to previous requests from the U.N. to visit the region.U.N.
In case he wishes, we would be pleased to host Mr. Zeid in our country in a way that would cover our Southeastern Anatolia region too,” Bilgiç said.In his statement, the top U.N. human rights official put particular emphasis on information emerging from a variety of credible sources about the actions of security forces in Cizre.“I strongly condemn violence and other unlawful acts committed by the youth groups and other non-state agents, allegedly affiliated with the PKK, in Cizre and other areas, and I regret any loss of life as a result of terrorist acts wherever they have occurred,” Zeid said.
“All these allegations, including those leveled at the groups fighting against the security forces, are extremely serious and should be thoroughly investigated, but do not appear to have been so far,” he added.A round-the-clock curfew in Cizre was in place for more than two months to conduct military raids on homes and shelters used by militants.
The curfew, which came into effect on Dec. 14, 2015, has been limited to half-days (between the hours of 7 p.m. and 5 a.m.) since March 2.The previous, months-long curfew subjected local residents to power blackouts, food and water shortages and destroyed neighborhoods.
Fierce clashes between PKK militants and security forces also halted education and health services in the towns placed under curfew.In early May, the country’s main opposition party said Cizre and all other zones of conflict should immediately be declared “disaster areas.”“Cizre should swiftly be taken in the scope of a disaster area and all the conflict zones in the region should be assessed within the same scope,” a delegation from the main opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) said in a report released on May 2.