Turkish crackdown on Kurds leaves death and destruction in border town of Cizre

Updated

Next to a dead dove, spelt out in bullet casings, are the words "Cizre de katliam var". "There are massacres in Cizre."

All around is a scene of total destruction - rockets have left gaping holes in houses and bullets have pockmarked everything.

Trenches and barricades fill the alleyways.

Cizre in Turkey is home to 130,000 residents who are mainly Kurdish. It sits at the intersection of Turkey, Iraq and Syria.

We were sitting in our house ... We didn't have any information. Suddenly, we saw that our house was being attacked. Cizre resident

The town has just been through a nine-day curfew, during which the Turkish military took control of the city from a local Kurdish youth militia, the YDG-H, who had declared certain neighbourhoods to be "autonomous".

By that, the YDG-H meant free of police control.

The militia had set up barricades and armed checkpoints throughout the town.

During the nine days of the Turkish military operation, nothing and no one was allowed in or out.

Phone networks, water and electricity were shut down, any movement between houses was forbidden.

The civilian death toll remains disputed.

Turkey's leading party the AKP claims one civilian was killed, while the opposition says 21 people died.

'Children could not go outside, they would be shot'

There is no doubt what side the local population are on.

The alleyways are filled with flags and graffiti celebrating the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) and its jailed leader Abdullah "Apo" Ocalan, to whom the YDG-H claims loyalty.

Locals enthusiastically show the damage that the "Turkish terrorists" have done to their homes.

In the garden of her ruined house, one woman gives her account.

"We were sitting in our house, we didn't know there was a curfew," she says.

"We didn't have any information. Suddenly, we saw that our house was being attacked."

She describes how soldiers tried to lure them out.

"They told us that we were all Armenians. 'Come Armenian, come outside the house,' they said," she says.

"Armenian" is a loaded term in this country - it has been used as a blanket insult to those who are not regarded as true Muslims.

Another resident describes the severity of the lockdown.

"The children could not poke their heads outside because they would be shot by snipers," they said.

Much of people's anger is directed at Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who, after renewed hostilities between the government and the PKK, announced that he was putting the peace process "in the fridge", and would crack down on the PKK using military force, "until not one terrorist" remained.

'Our friends are being killed in front of us'

At night, in a dark alleyway a local YDG-H fighter speaks defiantly.

"All of our friends are being killed in front of our eyes. This brute [Erdogan] should be stopped," he says.

"If this brute is not stopped, Turkey will pay a heavy price. If not by way of the law, he is going to pay his price by way of the youth of Cizre."

The fighter proceeds to make an appeal for Western support.

"What we say about this country is empty. Without Europe, without a mediator, it is not going to be solved," he says.

Many locals draw parallels between Cizre and the Syrian town of Kobani.

Kobani, a largely Kurdish town on the Syrian side of Turkey's southern border, was besieged by Islamic State (IS) fighters for six months before Kurdish militants, with the help of coalition airstrikes, broke the siege and started taking territory back from IS.

The Turkish government's apparent indifference to the fate of Kobani throughout the siege, and its refusal to let local Kurdish fighters enter the town from Turkey, led to the widespread perception among Kurds that Turkey was quietly colluding with IS.

In the June election, Turkey's current ruling party AKP its long-held majority when Kurds largely voted for the HDP, a left-wing pro-Kurdish party.

The new government failed to form a coalition, and an election has been called for November 1.

Casualties pile up on both sides of conflict

On July 20, an IS suicide bomb struck the largely Kurdish town of Suruc, Turkey, which sits just across the border from Kobani.

The PKK blamed the attack on the government and killed two Turkish soldiers.

Shortly afterward, Mr Erdogan announced that he would go after the PKK and IS in a "two-pronged" attack, almost all of which has so far been focused on the PKK.

Since then, the conflict has escalated, with a growing number of casualties on both sides.

For Western countries, it's a complicated game of alliances.

Locals in Cizre make constant appeals for Western support and moderation, but the PKK, which is widely popular among Kurds in the region, is considered a terrorist organization by Europe and America. Turkey is a member of NATO.

Meanwhile, Kurdish forces in Syria, the YPG, which is an offshoot of the PKK, have been battling IS with the help of American-led airstrikes.

Turkey has reason to worry that the formation of an autonomous Kurdish state on its southern border will further push its own Kurds to demand the same.

Topics: unrest-conflict-and-war, terrorism, turkey

First posted