CNN and Fox News among several news outlets to mistakenly report that a suspect in the Boston bombings had been arrested

The FBI issued a strongly worded warning to media covering the Boston bomb investigation on Wednesday after numerous outlets misreported an arrest in the case.

CNN, the Boston Globe, Fox News, the Associated Press and the BBC were among the organisations that carried inaccurate reports that a suspect either had been arrested or that an arrest was "imminent".

The claims quickly spread around the internet, leading to numerous secondary sources reporting the "arrest" as fact. CNN continued to stick by the story long after the FBI had said on record that the report was "inaccurate".

It prompted the FBI to issue a statement on the reporting of the investigation: "Contrary to widespread reporting, there have been no arrests made in connection with the Boston Marathon attack. Over the past day and a half, there have been a number of press reports based on information from unofficial sources that have been inaccurate.

"Since these stories often have unintended consequences, we ask the media, particularly at this early stage of the investigation, to exercise caution and attempt to verify information through appropriate official channels before reporting."

The latest round of false reports follows initial reporting from the New York Post on Monday that claimed that 12 people had died in the double blast, and that police had identified a Saudi man as a suspect. In fact, three people died, and claims of a Saudi man was being held were dismissed by Boston police commissioner Edward Davis.

There were also inaccurate reports on Monday night that police had found and dismantled a number of unexploded bombs, with the Wall Street Journal quoting sources claiming five devices in total.

The main culprit in Wednesday's misreporting appeared to be CNN. Based on unnamed "sources", the network first claimed that a significant breakthrough in the case had been made.

It later upgraded this to being an actual arrest in the case. Fox News sent out a tweet saying that it, too, had confirmed that an arrest had been made.

The Associated Press sent out a series of reports based on unnamed sources during a 90-minute period. First AP reported that an arrest was "imminent", citing a "law enforcement official". It then said the suspect was in custody and on his way to the federal court.

The Boston Globe went so far as to say that the suspect was being taken to the US district court in south Boston.

The reports of an arrest, however, flew in the face of the official line being put out.

While CNN continued to stick with the "arrest" line, the Guardian was repeatedly told on record by the FBI that the story was false. In a series of phone calls to the FBI's national office, a spokeswoman confirmed that "no arrests had been made".

The Guardian was not alone. Pete Williams of NBC News repeatedly pointed out that his sources were telling him that not only had no arrest been made, but that a suspect had yet to be identified.

The Boston police department eventually used its official Twitter feed to say the reports of an arrest were not true. The office of prosecutor Carmen Ortiz did likewise.

Embarrassingly for CNN, one of its own pundits, the former FBI assistant director Tom Fuentes, contradicted the story live on air, telling viewers that three sources, including two senior officials close to the investigation, had told him categorically that no arrest had been made.

Eventually, the network backtracked and acknowledged there had been no arrest. The CNN website blamed the mistake on a "misunderstanding among officials".

It said that the confusion centred on a Boston law enforcement official telling CNN "we got him", but not specifying whether if that meant that authorities had identified a suspect, or arrested one.

But the network said it would not apologise to viewers, with a spokesperson telling Michael Calderone of the Huffington Post: "CNN had three credible sources on both local and federal levels. Based on this information we reported our findings. As soon as our sources came to us with new information we adjusted our reporting."

It is not the first time that CNN has been forced to backtrack on breaking news. Reporting the supreme court verdict on Obama's healthcare reforms, it wrongly reported that the individual mandate part of the legislation had been struck down. The mistake was later blamed on a producer who had jumped the gun.