He faces federal capital charges; Massachusetts does not have a state death penalty

Boston bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev (Photo: FBI via AP) Story Highlights Lawyers for Dzhokhar Tsarnaev asked for more time to make their case Monday

Tsarnaev's lawyers said they have not received key evidence from prosecutors

Prosecutors say the lawyers have had six months to prepare

Lawyers for Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev have asked a judge to order federal prosecutors to give them more time to make their case against the death penalty.

In court Monday, Tsarnaev's lawyers said they have not received key evidence from prosecutors yet and have not had enough time to submit a proposal arguing that Tsarnaev does not deserve the death penalty.

A prosecutor argued it's been almost six months since the marathon bombing, a "reasonable" amount of time for the defense to make its case. He said prosecutors plan to make their recommendation to U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder by Oct. 31. Holder will have the ultimate say on whether to seek the death penalty.

Tsarnaev, 20, will be tried on federal charges in connection with the April 15 bombings, which left 3 people dead and more than 200 injured. Massachusetts does not have a state death penalty.

He is also accused of killing a Massachusetts Institute of Technology police officer while on the run three days later.

Tsarnaev has pleaded not guilty to 30 counts of a federal indictment, including using a weapon of mass destruction resulting in death and 16 other charges that carry the possibility of the death penalty.

A decision on whether to seek capital punishment will be made by U.S. attorney General Eric Holder on the advice of the U.S. attorney in Boston.

Tsarnaev, who is being held at a federal prison medical center outside Boston, was not expected to appear in court.

Dzhokhar Tsarnaev and his 27-year-old brother Tamerlan were both accused of building and planting pressure cooker bombs near the finish line of the annual race.

The older Tsarnaev died during a shootout with police April18. The brothers were attempting to flee the city after their sketches were released as suspects by the FBI.

Tsarnaev escaped by car and was found wounded the next day huddled in a boat in the backyard of a home in Watertown, Mass.

Authorities say the brothers were inspired by al-Qaeda publications and that Dzhokhar Tsarnaev left a confession in the boat in which he tried to justify the bombings as payback for U.S. military action in Muslim countries.

He wrote that the U.S. government was "killing our innocent civilians."

Contributing: AP

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ai7JNO