[np_storybar title=”Warning: Graphic details” link=””]

[/np_storybar]

Blaine Penny, 38, had just completed the Boston Marathon Monday in two hours, 36 minutes. He was heading back to his hotel through the Boston Common, the city’s central park, when he was jolted by two deafening explosions about 400 or 500 metres away.

“It stopped me in my tracks. I could see smoke rising and knew it was serious,” the Calgary engineer recounted hours later. “It was really loud. It’s hard to describe. I was thinking gunshot, but no, it’s way too loud to be a gunshot.

“We all looked at each other. What the hell was that?”

Within a minute, the streets filled with emergency response vehicles and the echo of sirens.

Penny, like many other Canadians, was caught up in the horrific bombings that, so far, are known to have killed two people and injured about a dozen more.

Elite runner Rob Watson, 29, of Vancouver, was having a celebration lunch with his brother and sister-in-law at his hotel about 200 metres from the finish-line when the blasts went off.

“There were two really loud explosions,” a shaken Watson said by phone from his hotel room in downtown Boston.

“We really didn’t know what to think. We looked outside because we thought it was thunder, but it was sunny out. And then the security guards, the people who work for the hotel, they all took off. When they came back they told us they had the hotel on lockdown.”

Watson, who placed 11th in the legendary marathon with a time of two hours, 15 minutes, said he and his family spent about 30 minutes with frantic hotel guests gathered in a room while police and emergency crews converged on the chaotic scene outside.

Watson said many of the Americans with him in the room were haunted by memories of 9/11.

“People were freaking out. There were lots of tears. People were running around,” he said.

“People didn’t know what the hell was happening.”

Windsor’s Ron Drouillard had just finished the race and was heading back to his hotel room for a nap when he heard the explosions.

“He’s looking for his friends,” said his wife, Ayeesha, who spoke to him shortly after the explosions. “Everyone is just running around and screaming. It’s like total chaos.”

Two Canadian political figures were also among the 2,078 Canadians registered to run Monday.

Yukon MP Ryan Leef finished the race. Former federal cabinet minister Stockwell Day was also registered to run, but the race website indicated he hadn’t crossed the finish line.

Leef told Postmedia News via Twitter: “I’m ok. I cleared the finish line before the explosion. I was 4 blocks out. Watched the emergency response race to the scene, but I couldn’t see the finish area by then.”

In a follow-up email, he said: “What a terrible thing to have happen to people, in what should have been their greatest of accomplishments.

“My thoughts are obviously with my fellow runners, organizers, volunteers, spectators and the families of the victims. We’ll all remember the 117th running of the Boston Marathon, but now, sadly, for a far different reason than we all wanted at the start line this morning.”

Day could not immediately be reached for comment.

The Canadian Consulate in Boston is about 250 metres from the marathon finish line. Monday, it was in lockdown mode, and calls were referred to the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade in Ottawa. All staff in the consulate were accounted for, DFAIT said.

The Boston Police Department said two people were known to be killed and 23 others injured.

The Canadian government said Canadians in Boston requiring emergency assistance could contact the consulate at (617)247-5100, or 1-800-387-3124, or by sending an email to sos@international.gc.ca.

Kyle McLaughlin, 37, an emergency room physician from Canmore, Alta., had finished the race and was back in his hotel room a few blocks away from the finish line when he heard about the explosions.

“I’ve done ‘event’ medicine before and this would be extremely stressful for the medical volunteers that are on the scene,” said McLaughlin, who was on his second visit to Boston. “It looks like they did a fantastic job in a difficult, scary situation.”

Laura McLean, a runner from Toronto, was in the medical tent being treated for dehydration when she was pulled out to make room for victims of the explosions.

McLean says she saw people who were “really, really bloody.”

Canadian Steve Di Tomaso had finished the race and was in a Starbucks a couple of blocks from the finish line, when he heard two explosions, about 10 to 15 seconds apart.

“Then we saw people running away. There was one explosion and then another and nobody knew what was happening.”

“There was a lot of confusion,” he said. “People were just in the finishing area – a lot of participants in the marathon were moving as fast as they could and clearing the streets.”

The runners closest to the explosion were probably those finishing with times of about four hours.

Rami Bardeesy, a Halifax runner, was staying in the Fairmount Copley Plaza, a block from where the explosions took place. All of the runners from Nova Scotia had finished the race before the explosions happened.

Bardeesy said inside the hotel, he and other runners heard two explosions, which he described as “a deep rumbling boom almost like a sharp impact, like it wasn’t something exploding, like something falling.

“We were thinking about making plans to go out … and we were told the hotel was in lockdown,” he said.

A veteran of the Boston Marathon, Bardeesy said security at the event has always been visible, but not intrusive.

Penny, the Calgary runner, said that after the blasts he made a beeline for his hotel, where he reunited with his wife and seven-year-old daughter.

He told Postmedia News he had run the Boston Marathon in 2009, and Monday contemplated taking another stroll by the finish line on his way back to the hotel, but decided against it because of the crowds.

“I could easily have been walking by there,” Penny said. “You walk away going, ‘Wow, a different turn could’ve been a different impact on your life.’”

Jordan Back, of North Vancouver, was doing the run with eight other people from his club. It was his “dream” to qualify and run in Boston.

He’s done lots of other marathons, but this was his first time in Boston. He finished in two hours and 41 minutes, then quickly got on train and headed back to hotel about two kilometres from finish line. About 40 minutes later he started hearing the sirens.

“It’s absolutely horrible,” he said. “Another thing that is a sad irony – this race was a tribute to the 26 adults and children killed in Newtown, Connecticut and they were dedicating these 26 miles to these 26 lives. To think that something this horrible could happen on a day when we were paying respect to those individuals … is really just hard to grasp.”

Prime Minister Stephen Harper put out a statement saying he was “shocked to learn of the explosions that occurred today during the running of the Boston Marathon. It is truly a sad day when an event as inspiring as the Boston Marathon is clouded by such senseless violence. “

– With files from the Vancouver Sun, Windsor Star and Postmedia News