SOMERVILLE - Sean Collier achieved after death the goal he was denied in life. He became a Somerville Police Officer Thursday evening.

"This fulfilled a dream he had his whole life," said Somerville Auxiliary Police Chief Jerry Carvalho. "He's looking down, saying 'yes!' with both thumbs in the air."

Collier, 26, a police officer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, was shot dead in his police cruiser on campus April 18, allegedly by Boston Marathon bombing suspects Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev. His killing sparked a chase and gun battle that resulted in Tamerlan Tsarnaev's death. Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was captured and is in jail awaiting trial. He faces 30 charges, and prosecutors could seek the death penalty.

In May, the Legislature passed and Gov. Deval Patrick signed a bill allowing Somerville Mayor Joseph Curtatone to posthumously appoint Collier to the department. At Somerville City Hall on Thursday, after a unanimous vote by the Board of Alderman, Curtatone and police officials presented Collier's badge, No. 310, to his parents as a room full of family, friends and police officers gave Collier a standing ovation. Richard Donahue, the transit police officer injured in the shootout with the Tsarnaev brothers, attended the commemoration.

If Collier were alive, Curtatone said, he would have raised his hand and recited the oath, signed a book as his family snapped pictures, and made the rounds shaking everyone's hand. "You can just picture it now," Curtatone said.

"Tonight's bittersweet," Curtatone said. "Tonight reminds us of the tragic loss of the hero Sean is, and it's comforting to us to feel we can do something in our hearts to say we're not ever going forget. Sean isn't here to take his oath and receive his badge number 310. But we can honor Sean's dream, legacy and service with a posthumous appointment to the Somerville Police Department."

Collier, a Winchester native, lived in Somerville and had close ties with its police force. He joined the Somerville auxiliary police force, a volunteer organization, when he was 19. He graduated high school and attended Salem State College, majoring in criminal justice. He was hired by the Somerville police force in 2008, first as an intern, then as a records clerk and information technology assistant.

He paid his own way through the Police Academy, sponsored by the Somerville Police Department. After graduating, he took a job with the MIT police, and spent a little more than a year there before he was killed. Collier always wanted to return to Somerville and was expected to be sworn in as a Somerville Police Officer this June.

Before the ceremony, Collier's colleagues at the Somerville Police Department recalled a man who was in love with police work and had a strong desire to help others. "He would have been a great cop," said Lt. Stephen Carrabino. "He was not only smart and mature beyond his years, he would go out of his way to help people."

Carrabino recalled a time when he was working on a personal presentation, unrelated to work, and had trouble displaying the presentation on a flat screen television. "(Sean) was a techie," Carrabino said. "He showed me how to do it, and said if you need help, I'll come with you."

George D'Amelio was hired by the Somerville Auxiliary Police toward the end of Collier's time there. D'Amelio said Collier was known for getting involved in his community and the auxiliary police force, volunteering to work at numerous road races. "He did it with pride and slowly worked his way up," D'Amelio said. "He did everything his own way, and he did it the right way."

A memorial service for Collier in April was attended by Vice President Joe Biden and law enforcement officials from around the country.

Members of Collier's family sat in the front row during Thursday's commemoration. Collier's brother, Andrew Collier, said although his brother has been called a hero, honorable and selfless since his death, he would be most proud of being called "a great cop."

"Sean held police to the highest honor," Andrew Collier said. "There was no one more respectable than an officer of the law."

"Being appointed as police officer after death is something that doesn't usually happen, but Sean wasn't a normal police officer," Andrew Collier said. "He was one of the best."

Also attending the event were public officials including Massachusetts U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, U.S. Rep. Michael Capuano and Attorney General Martha Coakley.

Chrissy Natoli, Collier's personal trainer, came to pay tribute to a client whom she recalled as a funny and joking man. But Natoli said Collier's commitment to police work was something he took with the utmost seriousness. "It was everything to him," she said. "He loved feeling like he was protecting everyone. He always wanted to keep everyone safe."

Somerville Police Chief Thomas Pasquarello, speaking before the board of alderman, said Collier's dream was to become a Somerville Police Officer. "It says a lot about Sean, his drive and determination, that even death did not deter him from accomplishing this goal," he said.