When news of the Boston Marathon bombing broke on Monday, Chinese bloggers thronged to Weibo, China’s equivalent of Twitter, to express their condolences with a mixture of horror and helplessness. Save for a few exceptions of vocal American antipathy, most people reacted with words of compassion for the three dead and hundred and seventy-six injured.

The emotion was real even if their sense of Boston as a place was largely imagined. The explosions had occurred, after all, half a world away. Yesterday evening, the Chinese Consulate finally confirmed the identity of the third fatality: a Chinese national in her mid-twenties, who was attending graduate school at Boston University and majoring in statistics.

What are the chances, bloggers across the country seemed to be asking themselves and each other, as the victim’s name leapt to the top of the most-searched list, along with a thin bio from her Weibo account. Despite attempts to keep the victim’s name private, it has been widely publicized, since last night, on English and Chinese media. Lu Lingzi was a native of Shenyang, a city in northeastern China about a hundred miles from the North Korean border. She attended Shenyang Northeastern High School, from which she graduated in 2008. She did well enough there to land a spot at the Beijing Institute of Technology, where she pursued a bachelor’s degree in international economics. In Boston, she had hoped to obtain her master’s.

On Monday afternoon, Lu joined the marathon-watchers with two other overseas Chinese friends, partaking in one of their first and more cacophonous of American traditions. Exploration seemed like a welcome pastime. On her Weibo photo album, Lu had already posted some of her favorite foreign forays: blueberry waffles, Godiva dark chocolate, a CD cover of an Itzhak Perlman violin concerto.

Near the finish line, the three girls may have stopped, craning their necks, immobile in a sea of flush, anxious faces. The sheer energy and anticipation, not two months after the Chinese Spring Festival, might have even reminded the recent émigrés of another holiday season, celebrated an ocean away.

It is unclear what happened next, whether she fell instantaneously or was carried to a nearby hospital. One of her companions, Zhou Danling, who was originally suspected as being the third person killed, underwent two surgical procedures and has since stabilized. (The other person in the group, currently unidentified, was not harmed). As of this writing, Lu’s name has been posted on Weibo more than a hundred thousand times, often followed by a virtual candle vigil of red and yellow flames. “This is a sad day for the Chinese people,” one blogger wrote. Another: “Never could have imagined that one of the casualties could be a sister from Shenyang.”

Not all the responses were so supportive. Some encouraged netizens across the country to examine these hazardous and tragic circumstances as a choice to be avoided: “Still safest to stay in China”; “See, America is no heaven!”

About the cause of the attack, there were few in-depth speculations, though one popular post, in the hours following announcement of Lu’s death, intoned coolly: “Look, from an ethical perspective, I truly hope that Americans will not again suffer the attacks of terrorists. At the same time … America should also stop attacking other countries and their people.”

Curiously, the only other term that has been searched and posted with comparable cyber frequency during this past week is the name of a twenty-seven-year-old at the prestigious Fudan University, in Shanghai. Huang Yang, the son of laid-off Sichuanese workers, was a third-year medical student, at the top of his academic class. A week ago, he was inexplicably poisoned, reportedly by his roommate.

On the blogosphere, many have coupled the untimely death of two promising “high talents” as the true crime of terror: “Putting aside their excellence as people, or the tremendous loss of their potential contribution to our country. The most important thing is that they are only children! For two families with aging parents to suffer this sort of loss…” a blogger lamented. Another added: “Everyone knows, only children are the lifelines of the family. Why would you ever let them leave your side??”

On Lu’s Weibo homepage, she posted her last update on the morning of April 15th, at 9 A.M. “My wonder breakfast!” she wrote on her Android, underneath a soup plate of green and orange fruit salad. On Tuesday night, more than ten thousand comments had gone up in response to this entry. One, from a young girl with round eyes and full cheeks not unlike Lu’s, typed her words next to a tiny emoticon of a single candle: “Maybe, like me, you also liked Sherlock and Downton Abbey. May you have a peaceful journey home, sister.”

Read more of our coverage of the Boston Marathon explosions.

Photograph by Meixu Lu/AP.