Updated at 8:50 a.m. Eastern.

LONDON Reaction poured in from around the world Tuesday to the double bomb attack on the Boston Marathon, which left three people dead and more than 140 wounded. Below is a snapshot of some of those remarks from world leaders, embassies, and one terrorist organization based in Pakistan.

AP

Saudi Ambassador to U.S., Adel bin Ahmed Al-Jubeir: "What occurred today in Boston is a heinous crime which contradicts the values of humanity."

According to a press release, Ambassador Al-Jubeir "strongly condemned" the bombings and offered condolences to the victims' families. He also expressed "confidence" that the perpetrators would be brought to justice.

The only person detained after the blasts was a Saudi national who CBS News correspondent John Miller reports was apparently in Boston on a student visa. He was being questioned by the FBI in a Boston hospital, where he was being treated for burns to his hands. The man, who officials are not calling a suspect or a person of interest at this stage, was seen running from the scene of one of the explosions and was tackled by a member of the public and turned over to police.

Getty

Mayor of London Boris Johnson: "The bombings in Boston are shocking, cowardly and horrific, and the thoughts of all Londoners this morning will be with the victims. Boston is a proud City built on history, tradition and a real sense of community. These attacks were aimed at its core, at innocent men, women and children enjoying a Spring day out at a major sporting event. We do have robust security measures in place for Sunday's London Marathon, but given events in Boston it's only prudent for the police and the organisers of Sunday's race to re-examine those security arrangements."

The Mayor's office said he had spoken to the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police to discuss security arrangements, including any additional measures that could be put in place, if deemed necessary, for Sunday's marathon. It wasn't clear whether additional security measures would be put in place for Wednesday's funeral of Baroness Margaret Thatcher, which was to include an elaborate military procession through central London.

CBS/AP

Pakistani Taliban: The TTP, or Pakistani Taliban denied any role Tuesday in the bombings at the Boston Marathon. The group's spokesman, Ahsanullah Ahsan, denied involvement in a telephone call with The Associated Press. He spoke from an undisclosed location.

The main focus of the Pakistani Taliban has been a bloody insurgency against the Pakistani government because of its alliance with the United States and to enforce Islamic law in the country.

The group has, however, threatened attacks in the U.S., and claimed responsibility for a failed car bombing in New York's Times Square in 2010.

Getty

Russian President Vladimir Putin Offered his country's assistance in investigating the bombings. Putin said in a condolences note published on the Kremlin's website Tuesday that the international community should come together to fight terrorism.

Russia "would be ready to provide assistance" to U.S. authorities with the investigation into the bombings, Putin said, according to the statement.

Russian sports officials said Tuesday they would beef-up security at upcoming sports events and the Sochi 2014 Winter Games in the wake of deadly explosions at Boston's marathon that killed three people, and injured over 140 others.

Getty

Afghan President Hamid Karzai: "Having suffered from terrorist attacks and civilian casualties for years, our people feel better the pain and suffering arising from such incidents," Karzai said in a statement. The release said Karzai "expressed grief over the civilian casualties" caused by the bombs.

Karzai offered his condolences and sympathy "to the families of the victims and the people of the United States of America," according to the statement.

Getty

French President Francois Hollande: sent his condolences to the families of the victims and expressed "France's total solidarity" with the American people and authorities.

Foreign minister Laurent Fabius issued a statement saying "our thoughts are with the families of the victims and with the injured". He also offered support and solidarity to the local and federal authorities. He added that the French consulate in Boston was mobilized to help any French citizens involved. A total of 158 French nationals had signed up for the marathon.

In a separate letter today to his counterpart, Secretary of State John Kerry, Fabius reiterated French solidarity with the American people, calling the explosions "a cowardly and barbaric act".

France's Interior Minister announced last night beefed up security measures at public buildings around the country.

AP

Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard: "Australia unreservedly condemns this brutal and senseless attack on what is a great event known around the world - one people participate in to have fun as their families and friends watch on.

"The images we've seen have been truly shocking ones and our thoughts today are with those who have lost loved ones and our condolences go to those who have lost family and friends in this tragic event... Our thoughts, our condolences are with those in Boston and we will continue to provide advice as we can about who is responsible for this senseless and very, very, cruel attack."

AP

Rio Olympics organizers: Rio Olympic organizers expressed their sadness after the deadly explosions at the Boston Marathon on Monday and quickly moved to reiterate that security is "a top priority" as the city prepares for the 2016 Games.

The 2016 Olympic committee offered condolences to those affected by the explosions and said it is constantly working with the local government to guarantee the games' safety.

"Rio 2016 offers its deep thoughts and condolences to everyone affected by this tragic incident," the committee said in a statement.

"Security is always a top priority for the Olympic andParalympic Games, and we are working very closely with our government partners to deliver safe games in 2016."