Doctors today described objects “clearly designed to be projectiles” removed from patients injured in yesterday’s Marathon explosions.

“There’s no question some of these objects were implanted in the device for the purpose of being exploded when the device went off,” said Dr. Ron Walls, Brigham & Women’s chair of emergency medicine.

They are “ball-bearing type” objects, “just a little larger than a BB,” said Walls, describing metallic beads about two to three millimeters in diameter. Surgeons also removed more than a dozen small “carpenter-type nails” about a centimeter to an inch in length from one patient, he said.

Citing a person briefed on the probe into the explosions, the Associated Press reported this afternoon that the bombs were made out of pressure cookers loaded with metal and ball bearings.

Authorities have told doctors to preserve as evidence any foreign material they remove from patients so it can be used as evidence.

At Boston Medical Center, five patients had their limbs amputated and others endured abdominal surgery after being wounded by what Dr. Andrew Ulrich, executive vice chairman of BMC’s Department of Emergency Medicine called “scrap metal like material.”

All told, Boston Medical Center took in 23 blast-related patients. Today, BMC still had 19 of those patients in their care. Ten of them are in critical condition, and three others are in three serious, said BMC trauma surgeon Dr. Tracey Dechert.

“The vast majority were low extremity patients, some of them had what we call traumatic amputations, due obviously to the bomb,” Dechert said. “Others had mangled extremities to the point that they we and those patients obviously required operations, and still will require operations.”

Doctors at Tufts Medical Center saw similar injuries, said Dr. William Mackey, Tuft’s surgery chief, who added that when the first casualties arrived, “we had six operating rooms open and ready to go.”

“We took in 19 patients from marathon, and 14 of them were disaster related, “ said Dr. Brien A. Barnewolt, Tufts Medical Center’s emergency physician-in-chief. “Ten were admitted to hospital and are still in hospital, and of those 10, four are expected to be released sometime today,” Barnewolt said.

The other six are in serious condition and will remain in the hospital for the foreseeable future, he added. Mackey said there were no patients at Tufts that suffered amputations.

Mackey said authorities – from local, state and federal agencies – asked the medical teams to save all the “shrapnel” removed from the victims.

“The shrapnel that was removed was small metallic objects, hard to identify,” he said. “They were very small fragments, ranging from maybe a centimeter in size to a few centimeters in size. Hard to tell what they represented.”

One woman, he said, had a piece of a zipper “embedded in her ankle joint, which is indicative of the force of the explosion.”

Ulrich described three hours of controlled chaos at Boston Medical Center yesterday, as ambulances roared in with maimed marathon spectators and frantic doctors and nurses raced in behind them to help.

“Our patients range from 5 to 78 years old,” said Ulrich. The 5-year-old is in critical condition.

“The injuries we saw were very much blast-related injuries, where we saw a lot of extremity injuries, a lot of limb amputations a lot of wounds that were from the blast itself,” he said.

“We also saw some patients with head injury as well as abdominal injury,” Dechert added.

“Many will need more operations in the coming days,” Dechert said, “and we expect that those in critical condition will do well in time.”

Ulrich said most of the explosion patients were not runners.

“Most of them were in the crowd,” he said.

He said authorities were quickly at the hospital, gathering evidence.

He also said 90 percent of the BMC staffers showed up to work during that time. Some Ulrich said, even came right off the race course, and into the ER.

“I’ve never been prouder to work here,” he said. “The staff response was outstanding.”

Twelve of the 31 people who came to Massachusetts General Hospital remain there this afternoon, said Dr. George Velmahos, chief of trauma, emergency surgery and surgical critical care.

“There have been four amputations, six or seven patients total are still critical,” he said. “Most are suffering from wounds from shrapnel and burns.”

He said more surgeries were expected today and tomorrow. Regarding the amputations, “There was very little discussion with the patients, most were in a state of shock, we were rushing to save lives. It was not a time for talking, it was a time for doing.”

Velmahos also said the hospital was innundated with people offering to give blood.

Between Brigham & Women’s Hospital and its Faulkner Hospital location, 44 patients were admitted, 13 of whom are in the operating room, and six of whom are in critical condition. The youngest patient was 16 and the oldest was 62. Patients are “about half and half” men and women.

At the Brigham, nine went to the operating room, five in critical condition. One had a below-the-knee amputation. Two other patients have “threatened limbs.” The patients are being watched very closely by trauma surgeons and nurses. “These limbs are still in jeopardy,” he said.

Of the nine that went into surgery, two returned to the OR today. Several more will be returning to the OR.

Initially 13 victims were seen and treated at Brigham and Women’s Faulkner Hospital, but only five remain hospitalized as of today, according to Dr. Richard E. Larson, chief of the depart of emergency.

“One of those five is critically ill,” said Larson.

The female patient suffered loss of tissue and bone in several places, including her feet, as well as additional shrapnel wounds.

Alasdair Conn, chief of emergency services at MGH, said the governor had come to the hospital this afternoon.

“He asked me what people can do,” said Conn. “‘Find the people who did this.’”

Tenley Woodman, Sara Gaynes and Jed Gottlieb contributed