Story highlights Khairullozhon Matanov is charged with destroying evidence in Boston blasts

He also faces three counts of making false statements to investigators

He is not charged with the bombings, but with trying to hide ties to the Tsarnaev brothers

A Massachusetts man was arrested Friday on suspicion of obstructing the investigation of the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings , authorities said.

Khairullozhon Matanov, 23, of Quincy is charged with "one count of destroying, altering, and falsifying records, documents, and tangible objects in a federal investigation, specifically information on his computer, and three counts of making materially false, fictitious, and fraudulent statements in a federal terrorism investigation," the U.S. attorney's office for Massachusetts said Friday.

An indictment against Matanov was unsealed Friday.

Authorities say brothers Dzhokhar and Tamerlan Tsarnaev planted bombs at the finish line of the 2013 race. Tamerlan Tsarnaev was killed during a subsequent manhunt that paralyzed Boston. Dzhokhar Tsarnaev has pleaded not guilty to killing four people -- including three killed by the bombings -- and wounding more than 200 others.

Matanov is not charged with participating in the bombings, but with trying to hide his connection to the Tsarnaev brothers.

Outside court Friday, Matanov's lawyer, Ed Haden, said the indictment was based on "unsubstantiated allegations."

"He had no intent to mislead the investigation," Haden said.

According to prosecutors, Matanov knew that investigators would want to talk to him after the bombings, and he allegedly tried to keep the FBI from learning the extent of his friendship and communication with the suspects.

Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings Evidence photos from Boston bombings – A police forensics team examines a boat April 22, 2013, in Watertown, Massachusetts, where Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was discovered several days earlier and taken into custody. Hide Caption 1 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings Massachusetts State Police released thermal images of Tsarnaev hiding in the boat on April 19, 2013. They were taken by an infrared device on a helicopter. The first image was taken at 7:19 p.m., less than 20 minutes after a homeowner told police there was a bloodied person in his boat. Hide Caption 2 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings This image from 7:22 p.m. shows a white heat signature large enough to be a person. Hide Caption 3 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings A robotic arm tears away the cover on the boat at 7:36 p.m. Hide Caption 4 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings The heat signature clearly shows the suspect's feet and the rest of his body behind the boat console at 8:01 p.m., minutes before he surrendered. Hide Caption 5 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings Boston Marathon bomb scene pictures, taken by investigators, show the remains of an explosive device. Hide Caption 6 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings A federal law enforcement source with firsthand knowledge of the investigation told CNN that a lid to a pressure cooker -- thought to have been used in the bombings -- had been found on a roof of a building near the scene. Hide Caption 7 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings One bomb was housed in a pressure cooker hidden inside a backpack, the FBI said in a joint intelligence bulletin. Hide Caption 8 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings The device also had fragments that may have included nails, BBs and ball bearings, the FBI said. Hide Caption 9 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings The recovered parts include part of a circuit board, which might have been used to detonate a device. Hide Caption 10 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings A law enforcement official said the bombs were probably detonated by timers. But the FBI said details of the detonating system were unknown. Hide Caption 11 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings Scraps of at least one pressure cooker, nails and nylon bags were sent to the FBI's national laboratory in Virginia, where technicians will try to reconstruct the devices, the agent leading the investigation said. Hide Caption 12 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings The U.S. government has warned federal agencies in the past that terrorists could turn pressure cookers into bombs by packing them with explosives and shrapnel and detonating them with blasting caps. Hide Caption 13 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings The pieces suggest each of the devices was 6 liters (about 1.6 gallons) in volume, a Boston law enforcement source said. Hide Caption 14 of 15 Photos: Evidence photos from Boston bombings "It has the hallmarks of both domestic and international (attacks), and you can see either side of that," former FBI Assistant Director Tom Fuentes told CNN. Hide Caption 15 of 15

Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Dias Kadyrbayev, left, with Boston Marathon bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsamaev in a picture taken from the social media site VK.com. Kadyrbayev is expected to plead guilty August 21 to charges in connection with removing a backpack and computer from Tsamaev's dorm room after the April 2013 bombing, according to a defense lawyer. Hide Caption 1 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Bombing suspect Tamerlan Tsarnaev was killed during the shootout with police in Watertown, Massachusetts, on April 19, 2013. He is pictured here at the 2010 New England Golden Gloves. Hide Caption 2 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was captured in a Boston suburb on April 19, 2013, after a manhunt that shut down the city. In July, he pleaded not guilty to killing four people and wounding more than 200. Hide Caption 3 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – From left, Azamat Tazhayakov and Dias Kadyrbayev went with Boston bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev to Times Square in this photo taken from the social media site VK.com. A federal grand jury charged Tazhayakov and Kadyrbayev with obstructing justice and conspiracy to obstruct justice relating to the removal of a backpack from Tsarnaev's dorm room after the bombings. Tazhayakov was convicted of conspiracy and obstruction charges in July 2014. He faces up to 25 years in prison at his sentencing in October. He has filed an appeal. Hide Caption 4 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Robel Phillipos, a U.S. citizen, was also arrested on May 1, 2013 . He was charged with lying to federal agents about the bombing, according to court papers. Hide Caption 5 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Phillipos, Tazhayakov and Kadyrbayev are accused of removing items from Tsarnaev's dorm room after the bombings on April 15, 2013. The items they took included a backpack containing fireworks that had been "opened and emptied of powder," according to the affidavit. Hide Caption 6 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – The FBI released photos and video on April 18, 2013, of two men identified as Suspect 1 and Suspect 2 in the deadly bombings at the Boston Marathon. They were later identified as Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, 19, and his brother Tamerlan Tsarnaev, 26. Hide Caption 7 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Boston Police released surveillance images of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev at a convenience store on April 19, 2013. Hide Caption 8 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – The FBI tweeted this photo on April 19, 2013, and urged Watertown residents to stay indoors as they searched for the second suspect. Hide Caption 9 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – The FBI released photos and video on April 18, 2013, of two men it called suspects in the deadly bombings and pleaded for public help in identifying them. The men were photographed walking together near the finish line. Hide Caption 10 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – A man identified as Suspect 2 appeared in this photograph by bystander David Green, who took the photo after completing the Boston Marathon. Green submitted the photo to the FBI, he told Piers Morgan in an interview. Hide Caption 11 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – The man identified as Suspect 2 appears in a tighter crop of David Green's photo. Hide Caption 12 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Authorities later identified Suspect 1 as Tamerlan Tsarnaev. Hide Caption 13 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 2 was identified as Dzhokhar Tsarnaev. Hide Caption 14 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 1 walks through the crowd. Hide Caption 15 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 1 walks through the crowd. Hide Caption 16 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 1 walks through the crowd. Hide Caption 17 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Both suspects are seen walking through the crowd. Hide Caption 18 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 2 walks through the crowd. Hide Caption 19 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 2 walks through the crowd. Hide Caption 20 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – A photo released by the FBI highlights Suspect 2. Hide Caption 21 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – A photo released by the FBI highlights Suspect 2. Hide Caption 22 of 23 Photos: Photos: Suspects tied to Boston bombings Suspects tied to Boston bombings – Suspect 2 walks through the crowd. See all photography related to the Boston bombings. Hide Caption 23 of 23

Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – People pause Tuesday, April 15, as the American flag is raised at the finish line of the Boston Marathon, where two homemade bombs went off one year ago. It was the deadliest terrorist attack in the United States since 9/11. Hide Caption 1 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – A wreath was laid at one of the bomb sites, under a steady rain on Boston's Boylston Street. Hide Caption 2 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – Sharon Neary, of Rochester, New York, cries while watching Tuesday's ceremony in Boston. Hide Caption 3 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – The family of Martin Richard, an 8-year-old boy killed in the attack, meet with Cardinal Sean Patrick O'Malley during the wreath-laying ceremony. Martin was one of three people killed in the bombings. At least 264 people were injured. Hide Caption 4 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – From left, former Boston Mayor Tom Menino, Boston Mayor Martin Walsh, Vice President Joe Biden and Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick lower their heads for a moment of silence during the tribute. "America will never, ever, ever stand down," Biden said during the ceremony. "We are Boston. We are America. We respond, we endure, we overcome and we own the finish line." Hide Caption 5 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – Olivia Savarino, facing the camera, hugs Christelle Pierre-Louis during the ceremonies on Boylston Street. Savarino was working at the Forum restaurant when a bomb went off in front of the building on April 15, 2013. Hide Caption 6 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – Flowers lie on the finish line of the Boston Marathon. The annual race will take place next Monday, April 21. Hide Caption 7 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – Members of the Boston Police Department, the Boston Fire Department and the Massachusetts State Police march prior to Tuesday's wreath-laying ceremony. Hide Caption 8 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – A Boston police officer waves traffic across the finish line. Hide Caption 9 of 10 Photos: Photos: Boston Marathon bombing anniversary Boston Marathon bombing anniversary – Running shoes are laid out in a display at the Boston Public Library. It's called "Dear Boston: Messages from the Marathon Memorial." Hide Caption 10 of 10

Prosecutors said that Manatov did not know about the bombings beforehand, but about 40 minutes after the blasts, invited and bought dinner for the brothers, according to the indictment.

According to the indictment, once photos of the suspects were released, Matanov viewed them several times on CNN and on the FBI's website before trying to reach Dzhokhar Tsarnaev.

In the hours and days following the bombings, Matanov contacted and attempted to contact the suspects by phone and saw Tamerlan Tsarnaev at least twice, according to the indictment.

Matanov allegedly tried to give away his cell phone to friends and deleted hundreds of videos and documents from his computer and misled police about the extent of to which he knew the brothers.

He also hid that he shared the "philosophical justification for violence" that the Tsarnaev brothers held, the U.S. attorney's office said.

"In addition to deleting information from his computer, Matanov made a number of false statements to federal investigators," the office's statement said.

If convicted, Matanov faces up to 20 years in prison for the destruction of evidence charge, and eight years for each of the false statement counts.

In separate cases , two friends of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev's -- Dias Kadyrbayev and Azamat Tazhayakov -- pleaded not guilty in September to a superseding federal indictment charging them with conspiracy to obstruct justice and obstructing justice with intent to impede authorities.

A third friend, Robel Phillipos, pleaded not guilty to making false statements to FBI agents during the bombings investigation.

Phillipos was free on $100,000 bond and was being monitored electronically; Kadyrbayev and Tazhayakov, Kazakh nationals, were being held without bail.

Authorities accused the trio of helping Tsarnaev after the deadly April 15, 2013, bombing by taking items from his dorm room and keeping them from authorities. Attorneys for the men denied the allegations.