Photo

HONG KONG — Grief over a Chinese student who was killed in the Boston Marathon bombing rippled across her home country on Wednesday as Internet sites and news reports described and celebrated a young woman whose ambitions for a career in finance were cut harshly short.

Boston University and the Chinese Consulate General in New York have said the victim was a graduate student at the college, but the consulate said her family asked that no personal details be disclosed. A classmate, a Chinese university official and a state-run newspaper in her home city have said she was Lu Lingzi, who accompanied a friend to watch the marathon near where the blasts shook the streets.

Even without government confirmation that Ms. Lu was one of three people killed in the explosion on Monday, Chinese Internet sites filled with mournful messages about a woman whose aspirations took her from a rust-belt hometown, Shenyang, to Beijing and then the United States. Her account on Weibo, a Twitter-like microblogging service used by tens of millions of people in China, attracted more than 10,000 messages, mostly of condolence, in the hours after the Chinese news media reported her death.

“You are in heaven now, where there are no bombs,” said one message.

Ms. Lu, 23, had become interested in Christianity, said a fellow Chinese student at Boston University, Lu Meixu, who is not related but is also from Shenyang.

Photo

Ms. Lu’s own final message on Weibo was posted on Monday. It showed a picture of a bowl of Chinese fried bread and said, “My wonderful breakfast.” Ms. Lu, shown on her Weibo page as a petite woman with thick shoulder-length hair, said there that she enjoyed food, music and finance. Other Facebook photos showed her at Toah Nipi, a Christian retreat center in southern New Hampshire.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Although China’s and the United States’ perceptions of each other are often overshadowed by political rancor, Ms. Lu’s death gave a melancholy face to the attraction that America and its colleges exert over many young Chinese. More than 194,000 Chinese students were enrolled in American colleges and universities in the 2011-12 academic year, far exceeding any other foreign country, according to the Institute of International Education. And Boston, with its many colleges and the cachet of Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has long been a magnet for them.