The Saudi national once considered a "person of interest" in the Boston Bombings and who Blaze sources say was being considered for deportation as early as Tuesday was apparently flagged on a terror watch list, according to Fox News reporter Todd Starnes.

Blaze sources say Abdul Rahman Ali Alharbi was linked in some way to the Boston Bombings in a deportation document.

Saudi National Once Considred Person of Interest Was Flagged on Terror Watch list: Todd Starnes More

A photo allegedly of Abdul Rahman Ali Alharbi in the hospital.

Fox News' Todd Starnes is reporting that Alharbi was allegedly on this list and granted a student VISA without being properly vetted. These accusations come from a source who is purportedly familiar with the investigation. Starnes has more:

The Saudi national who was initially detained and then ruled out as a suspect in the Boston Marathon terrorist attack had been flagged on a terror watch list and was granted a student visa without being properly vetted, sources have told me. A source close to the investigation revealed that Abdul Rahman Ali Alharbi had been deemed inadmissible under the section of the Immigration and Nationality Act which declares ineligible for a visa - any alien who is engaged in or is likely to engage after entry - in terrorist activity. At least two additional sources have confirmed to me that Ali Alharbi is set to be deported as early as this week, contrary to statements made by Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano. [...] Napolitano denied anyone was being deported in a heated exchange Thursday with Rep. Jeff Duncan (R-SC) during a House hearing. "I am unaware of anyone who is being deported for national security concerns at all related to Boston," she said. "I don't know where that rumor came from."

On Sunday, TheBlaze reported that the House Committee on Homeland Security is officially requesting more information about Alharbi, who was previously described as a "person of interest" immediately following last Monday's terror attack.

As TheBlaze's Erica Ritz previously explained, Alharbi has been at the center of debate after he was reportedly set to be deported under section 212 3B of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) - "Security and related grounds" - "Terrorist activities," following the bombing.

Read Starnes report here.

-

Other Must-Read Stories: