Photo

A friend of the man accused of detonating two pressure-cooker bombs at last year’s Boston Marathon was convicted on Tuesday by a federal jury in Boston of lying to F.B.I. agents during their investigation of the attack.

On the sixth day of deliberations, the jury found Robel Phillipos, 21, guilty of two counts of lying to F.B.I. agents when they asked whether he had been in the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth dormitory room of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, who is charged in the bombings, as two other friends removed potential evidence.

The material removed included a computer and a backpack containing fireworks tubes, some of which had been emptied of their powder, the authorities said. “He lied to agents when he could have helped. He concealed when he could have assisted,” Carmen M. Ortiz, United States attorney for the district of Massachusetts, said Tuesday in a statement.

The two other friends who were in Mr. Tsarnaev’s dorm room — Dias Kadyrbayev and Azamat Tazhayakov — are awaiting sentencing on obstruction of justice charges.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Phillipos’s defense was that he had not intentionally lied to F.B.I. agents — rather that he had smoked so much marijuana on the day the items were removed that he was unable to accurately answer their questions.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Michael Dukakis, a former Massachusetts governor and the 1988 Democratic presidential nominee, testified on Mr. Phillipos’s behalf, saying he had been a longtime friend of the family.

Mr. Phillipos, who was not accused of removing the items from the room, faces up to eight years in prison for each of the two counts. Lying to an F.B.I. agent usually carries a maximum sentence of five years in prison for each count, but the jury determined that he had lied during the course of a federal terrorism investigation. Sentencing has been scheduled for late January.