One of two men wrongly branded as the Boston bomber has a message for the world: “I didn’t do it.”

Teenager Salah Barhoum’s face was plastered on the front page of the New York Post Thursday, labeling him and a friend “Bag Men” being sought by authorities investigating the Boston Marathon bombings.

LIVE BLOG: THE LATEST ON BOSTON MARATHON BOMBINGS

But the FBI later released surveillance of the actual suspects — neither of whom resembled the bag-toting Barhoum and his friend on the tabloid’s cover.

“The only thing they look at is my skin color and since I'm Moroccan I'm kind of dark,” said Barhoum, a 17-year-old high school track star.

“A lot of people have bags, not just me. I thought, ‘Why me?’"

Suspicion began after the New York Post published pictures of Barhoum and a pal, near the top left corner of the photo, and suggested they were suspects in the case. (Ben Levine/Deadspin)

Barhoum joined his mom and dad as a gaggle of reporters asked what it felt like to be run down in a rush to judgment.

"It's such a disaster,” he said at the impromptu press conference at the modest basement apartment he shares with his parents in Revere, Mass. “To be blamed for all that injury and death. It's the worst."

In reality, Barhoum said he just wanted to watch the marathon like everyone else.

"We're just athletes. We love running and we love to watch running," he said.

“Everyone is welcome to come here and check (me out),” he added. “I'm not scared.”

Front page of the New York Post on April 18, 2013

The teen, who works at Subway, and his friend were photographed at the finish line wearing backpacks — like many people in the crowd of spectators. He said they left the race two hours before the 2:50 p.m. explosions, still carrying his Nike bag that contained gym clothes and sneakers.

On Wednesday armchair investigators on the message board Reddit quickly ID’d the pair as possible suspects, but then almost as quickly, deemed them innocent after finding their Facebook pages and other easy-to-find online information.

Seeing all the chatter, a friend advised Barhoum to talk to the police.

“He told me you have to stand up for yourself — you can't just let people talk," Barhoum said. “Yesterday I got more than 200 phone messages!"

At 1:30 a.m. Thursday he turned himself in to cops, who spoke to him for about 20 minutes and let him go.

Their only advice: “They said I should delete my Facebook,” Barhoum said.

Salah Eddine Barhoum at the Marathon.

Nevertheless, The Post reported splashed their faces on its pages and suggested they were suspects.

Even after the FBI cleared the pair, Post Editor-in-Chief Col Allan said, “We stand by our story.”

“The image (of the two) was emailed to law enforcement agencies yesterday afternoon seeking information about these men, as our story reported,” Allan said in a statement. “We did not identify them as suspects.”

Still, labeling Barhoum — who participated in the Junior Olympics — and his pal as “Bag Men” amounted to a new low for the paper, which already faced scathing criticism this week for initially standing by its reporting that 12 people died in the bombings, as well as reporting that a “Saudi national” was in custody in connection to the attacks.

Barhoum’s dad El Houssein Barhoum, 42, was definitely not in a forgiving mood.

El Houssein Barhoum (left) is not in a forgiving mood after his son, Salah (right), was plastered on the front page of the New York Post and labeled a suspect in the Boston Marathon bombings. 'Who will pay for the mistake? It is us. I can't send my kid to school!' the elder Barhoum said. (Todd Maisel/New York Daily News)

"Whoever did this is a real criminal," he said. “This is a mistake — but who will pay for the mistake? It is us. I can't send my kid to school!"

His son concurred: "People are definitely going to be looking for me just to hurt me. It's too much."

The egregious error was even addressed by FBI agent Richard DesLauriers as he unveiled the surveillance images of the actual suspects in the attacks.

“The only official photos that should be relied upon are those you see before you today,” he said.

The fiasco was reminiscent of the “trial by media” endured by Richard Jewell — the security guard wrongly accused of the Centennial Olympic Park bombing in the 1996 Summer Olympics. Jewell was exonerated — but not before being labeled a criminal and pilloried nationwide.

Barhoum, said this incident has caused him to lose sleep and is worried about his college prospects. (Todd Maisel/New York Daily News)

Barhoum’s unwanted moment in the media spotlight had already taken a toll.

“Last night I couldn't sleep, just thinking about the consequences: What are people going to say and what the result is going to be,” he said.

His fears had already been realized. A friend at Revere High School said a bully was picking on Barhoum, derisively calling him “an Arab” Thursday morning while they ran track together.

“He really took it to heart — he's a really nice kid" said Renan Marchet, 18. "This is crazy. There's nothing bad about this kid."

Just walking down the street had become stressful.

Website Reddit has called for a ban on posting abou the now-cleared Barhoum. (Todd Maisel/New York Daily News)

“This guy saw me going to this track meet and he called his friend on the phone, 'Hey that's the guy on the news!' Then I ran away," Barhoum said.

By Thursday morning, Reddit users had called for a ban on posting anything about the now-cleared Barhoum.

"I want the people who did this to apologize. I didn't deserve this," said Barhoum. "Colleges aren't going to want me now."

Barhoum’s friend could not be reached Thursday.

A Post reporter who was on hand at Barhoum’s press conference declined to comment on the paper’s reporting.

mmorales@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!