Boston transit cop wounded in firefight with marathon bombers is expected to make full recovery...but doctors have left a bullet in his leg



The Boston transit police officer critically wounded in the gun battle with the Boston bombing suspects thanked those who helped his recovery today - as he revealed doctors have left a bullet in his leg.



Richard 'Dic' Donahue took to the Boston transit police web site to express his gratitude to those who saved his life two weeks ago as he was fired upon by Tamerlan and Dzokhar Tsarnaev during a ferocious shootout in Watertown.



'I cannot begin to properly thank everyone involved in my recovery, as many fearless individuals stepped up and acted heroically that night,' wrote Donahue, 33, on the blog.

Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) Police officer Richard Donohue Jr. Is shown with his wife Kim, in this handout photo released by MBTA in Boston May 1, 2013

Donahue, married to wife Kim, was responding to a call for assistance at the scene of a shooting in the quiet Boston suburb when he exchanged fire with the suspects and was shot in the leg.



The bullet severed his femoral vein and artery, causing rapid blood loss, doctors said.

'CPR was started in the field, and he required a prolonged resuscitation that started at the scene and at our emergency room,' Dr. David Miller, a critical care doctor at Mt. Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, said during a briefing at the hospital.



Nauta later explained that Donahue's heart had stopped for more than 45 minutes before doctors were able to restore his pulse.



Richard Donohue Jr., is shown in this handout photo provide by the MBTA April 19, 2013. Donahue was injured in a shootout late April 18, 2013 with Boston Marathon bombing suspects Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev

Meanwhile, the officer had lost all of his own blood so doctors had to perform transfusions to replace it. Eventually a surgical team was able to stop the bleeding in time to save his leg.



The three-year veteran of the department was put on a ventilator for days after being wounded during the firefight.



'I am now awake, moving around, talking, and telling jokes (much to my Wife's dismay),' said Donahue.



'I am able to walk briefly through the use of a walker. My pain varies day to day and I still have a long road of rehab and recovery ahead, but I am optimistic I'll recover back to 100%.'



Donahue revealed that one of the bullets fired will be left inside his leg - as it poses no risk or danger.



'The bullet will remain in my leg as it is not obstructing anything or causing any pain,' said Donahue.



'However my wife has informed me that the bullet will ultimately cause her the most pain, as I will be using it to get out of things such as mowing the lawn, doing laundry, and painting the deck.'



Sadly for Donahue, his friend Sean Collier was shot and killed by Tamerlan and Dzokhar Tsarnaev during the astonishing events of April 19th.

In this 2010 photo provided by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, Richard Donohue Jr., left, and Sean Collier pose together for a photo at their graduation from the Municipal Police Officers' Academy

Turn out: Hundreds of people turned out to pay their respects to Collier, 26, was shot multiple times in his car on April 18th



'My wife and I send heartfelt condolences to the Collier family. Sean was one of my good friends out of the Academy and I arrived on scene soon after Sean's attack,' said Donahue.



'There is not a single day we are not thinking or speaking of Sean. And we are certain Sean was watching over me and assisted in saving my life. He could not save himself that night, but Sean could save me.'



Richard Donahue and the slain MIT officer, Sean Collier, graduated from the police academy together in 2010.

