Here's everything else we think we know about "Suspect No. 2" — the one in the white hat, the one on the loose in a chaotic scene in Boston — and his dead brother, Tamerlan, based on the flood of incoming reports.

This article is from the archive of our partner . On Friday, after a chaotic evening saw his partner in crime (and apparently his older brother) killed and as a city locked down to find him, Dzhokhar A. Tsarnaev emerged as the name of the man in the ongoing manhunt in Boston Friday. According to information culled from multiple reports, Tsarnaev is a 19-year-old reportedly from Kyrgyzstan who has been living, for the past year, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Here's are the basics of what we know about "Suspect No. 2" — a.k.a. the suspect in the white hat, the one authorities apparently saw drop a bomb-laden backpack in security footages, and the one currently being pursued by police: Tsarnaev was a student at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, which is closed for the day; he has been in this country for at least one year; his father is currently in Russia and is claiming that the two boys aren't/weren't religious. His uncle is also speaking out about Dzhokhar and Tamerlan, his now dead brother and apparently fellow suspect in the Boston Marathon bombings.

This Is Reportedly His Yearbook Picture: Yearbook pic of Boston bombing suspect, given to me by fmr classmate. "He was quiet". twitter.com/Brynn4NY/statu… — Brynn Gingras (@Brynn4NY) April 19, 2013 His Dad Says He's a Medical Student and an "Angel" This is bizarre, but apparently the AP has caught up with Tsarnaev's father who is claiming he's a second-year medical student. "My son is a true angel ... Dzhokhar is a second-year medical student in the U.S. He is such an intelligent boy. We expected him to come on holidays here." the AP reports. Second-year medical students aren't usually 19, and this is the first time that Dzhokhar's career aspirations have been mentioned. According to ABC News, Tsarnaev's father spoke to them yesterday and asked them if they were hurt in the bombings. Further, Dzhokhar's father urged him to surrender, but that was wrapped in a warning to police: "Give up. Give up. You have a bright future ahead of you. Come home to Russia," the dad said. The father warned, however, "If they killed him, then all hell would break loose." "If they kill my second child, I will know that it is an inside job, a hit job. The police are to blame," the father told ABC News. "Someone, some organization is out to get them." His Uncle Called Him a Loser BREAKING: When I told the uncle that one of his nephews was killed in a gunfight with police he said he "deserved it." #bostonmarathon #wbz — Peter Wilson (@PetesWire) April 19, 2013 "Of course we're ashamed," the suspects' uncle Ruslan Tsarni said, saying that the Tsarnaev family received asylum, stating that his family "had nothing to do with them for a long-long time. ... This has nothing to do with Chechnya."

"I just wanted my family [to] be away from them." He added. "I respect this country, I love this country." Their Aunt Thinks They Were Framed That's what she told The Toronto Sun. Maret Tsarnev said: My brother’s two boys, they are growing up so fast. My first reaction is, ‘Why the hell would they do this?’ But when I go through all the material, it’s not giving anything … the whole world is now making a decision (on them) now by just seeing these pictures and not having anything else Tsarnev told reporters and CNN that it goes a bit further than just character. She told them "The photos are staged ... they [her nephews] are being set up." He Is a Registered Student at University of Massachusetts Dartmouth UMass Dartmouth is closed today, explaining that a registered student was being sought by police. Buzzfeed Rosie Gray has an interview with Tsarnaev's classmates who say he was a student there. One of His Friends Is a Nephew of Boston Radio Journalist Robin Young: heart is broken. just confirmed, I know dzhokhar tsarnave, one of best freinds of my beloved nephew,who says he never in his life saw this. — Robin Young (@hereandnowrobin) April 19, 2013 Here Is His Wanted Poster: And His Latest FBI Photo: