Last week’s Boston Marathon bombing shook the world to its core when someone – likely the brothers Tsarnaev – bombed one of the country’s oldest and most beloved sporting events leaving a trail of death, destruction, and suffering in their wake.

But the arrest of Dzokhar Tsarnaev did very little to calm the nerves of the American people. We wanted to know more. Were there more bombs? Was it just Dzokhar and Tamerlan or were there others? Was there more danger lurking?

These are all good questions and we needed to get answers quickly – while Dzokhar was still alive and while we were still safe, at least for the moment. So, it came as a surprise this week when the revelation that investigators were going to question Dzokhar without a Miranda advisement caused such a furor in the media and on the internet. After all, the public’s safety was at stake, right? If there was another bomb out there, we needed to know – not later, but Now. And investigators certainly weren’t going to read the kid his rights and give him a chance to “lawyer up” if they didn’t have to. Or, more importantly, if they thought that the courts said they didn’t have to.

But then it came out that investigators might not stop there. They might actually continue interrogating Dzokhar without a Miranda advisement for the very fear that he might actually invoke his right as an American citizen to have a lawyer present during questions. They were going to push this whole “public safety exception” to its logical extreme.

We won’t know for quite a while what kind of questions investigators asked him and what Dzokhar’s responses were. According to one news outlet, investigators claimed to be asking about other cell members and other unexploded bombs. If that’s true, then any challenge to Dzokhar’s answers being admitted into evidence could be difficult. But even that’s in dispute. At least one legal expert seems to think that there was no basis for the public safety exception and that law enforcement could have compromised their case because any statements they obtained will ultimately be inadmissible.

Whether or not the courts will hold that the public safety exception applies in what will surely become known as the “Boston bomber case” remains to be seen. But as the Wall Street Journal and Slate rightly point out, the post-911 “War on Terror” has definitely put Miranda and Americans’ constitutional rights on shaky ground.

We even have one senator (also a lawyer presumed to know the law) saying that Dzokhar, an American citizen, should be denied his rights altogether and treated as an enemy combatant.

Whichever way it goes, now more than ever Americans should realize that no one is going to exercise their constitutional rights for them and, like this case, police might not even feel like they have to remind you that you have rights as Miranda v. Arizona requires.

With rights come responsibilities and we, as Americans, are responsible for knowing our rights and exercising them if they are going to have any meaning. So, the next time a police officer starts questioning you or someone you love, remember this one word: “lawyer.” That’s all you have to say and probably all you should say.