“The Boston bombings have only added to the sense of unease amongst investors . . . equity markets have slipped in the past few days on worries that the U.S. and Chinese economies have hit an air pocket of economic activity,” Neil MacKinnon, global macro strategist at VTB Capital, told the Associated Press.

The explosions killed three people near the finish line of the iconic race. It’s unclear who was behind the attack but it served as a reminder to investors of vulnerability during the global economic recovery.

Uncertainty in the wake of deadly explosions at the Boston Marathon Monday has added to unease in U.S. and international markets.

The NYSE, Nasdaq, and NYMEX held moments of silence for the victims Tuesday morning, according to CNBC.

The Boston attack, striking runners near the peak finish time Monday afternoon and injuring at least 144 people, accelerated selling off of stocks on Wall Street Monday.

Investors were already dealing with declines in commodity prices, including gold, as well as disappointing manufacturing and other economic data from the U.S. and China.

Commodity-related shares led stocks’ losses, with gold suffering its worst two-day sell-off in 30 years as the China data fueled worries about the strength of the global economy.

The SPDR Gold Shares ETF (GLD.P) lost 8.8 percent to $131.31 on record volume. Total trading volume was the second highest of the year, with about 8.5 billion shares changing hands on U.S. exchanges.

It was the biggest daily percentage drop for the Dow Jones industrial average, the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index and the Nasdaq Composite Index since Nov. 7, when the market sold off following the U.S. presidential election.

“I don’t think the market has much tolerance for bad news,” said Uri Landesman, president of Platinum Partners in New York, told Reuters Monday afternoon.

“There was a bad Chinese GDP number, which I think spooked people to start, and technical factors. Profit-taking started taking over. Late in the day, we were getting hit by reports that there were explosions in Boston. That gets people nervous.”

While most North Americans slept overnight, in Europe the FTSE 100 index of leading British shares was down 0.5 percent at 6,312 in early trading, while Germany’s DAX fell 0.4 percent to 7,6745.

Earlier in Asia, stocks were mixed after being hit Monday by lower than anticipated Chinese economic growth figures. While Japan’s Nikkei fell 0.4 percent to close at 13,221.44 and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng lost 0.5 percent to 21,672.03, benchmarks in South Korea and mainland China rose.

The online world responded quickly, while cell service was reportedly down in parts of Boston in the hours following the explosions.

Google set up its Person Finder for people looking for lost loved ones, and responders who had found people. By early evening 25,000 records had been entered.

The service lets users subscribe to information about specific people and update their status.

It was initially setup in January 2010 in the aftermath of Haiti’s earthquake, inspired in part by several similar services created five years earlier in the wake of Hurricane Katrina. Since then, Google’s finder has been activated following large-scale disasters, such as the 2011 Japan tsunami and the earthquake in Christchurch, New Zealand.

With files from the Associated Press and Reuters