Transit Officer Richard Donohue, Jr. who was shot in the thigh while trying to capture Boston Marathon bombing suspects Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev. (Photo by Justin Opiechowski)

BOSTON (CBS) – Wounded transit officer Dic Donohue reminisced Tuesday morning on 98.5 The Sports Hub’s Toucher & Rich about that fateful night in Watertown one year ago as well as his road to recovery.

“Physically I’m doing a lot better. I’m still in quite a bit of pain. I’m taking it day-by-day, but you gotta measure it month-to-month instead of day-to-day and look at your progress that way,” Donohue said. “All in all pretty positive though.”

Donohue’s young son is at that age now where he’s moving around and mobile, which helps keep him active and takes his mind off of things.

“He really keeps me on my toes and motivates me to get better. He obviously doesn’t understand and doesn’t care, he just wants to play with his dad and his dog and that sort of thing. He keeps me going. It’s awesome.”

Today marks the one year anniversary of the Boston Marathon bombings, and in just a few short days the Watertown firefight will also hit its one year anniversary.

The word gets thrown around a lot, but given the amount of blood lost in that neighborhood shootout, Donohue’s survival is truly a miracle — something he acknowledged with Fred and Rich.

“All in all they said it was a two percent chance I’d survive, nevermind being the state I’m in today. I don’t have any explanation for it. I’m a pretty lucky guy. I don’t think I’ll ever win the lottery because I think I used up all my luck, but I’m happy with the end result.”

This will be a busy week for Donohue as he has multiple appearances scheduled, but as far as Marathon Monday itself goes, he plans on spending it with family and friends at a private function.

He adds, “I’m gonna try and keep a low profile that day.”

Donohue’s spirit is a true testament to the resolve of this great city, and his attitude and outlook is truly inspiring.

Listen below for the full interview:

