Questions have been raised in recent days about the political and religious beliefs of Tamerlan Tsarnaev, the Boston Marathon bombing suspect killed in a gunfight with police in the early hours of Friday. Anecdotes suggest that Tamerlan became more religious in the last several years and may have embraced more conservative Islamic ideas, although no link has been established between him and any known terrorist group.

On Monday, a spokesman for the Islamic Society of Boston, a Cambridge mosque frequented by Tamerlan, contributed to the emerging debate over the suspect’s religious beliefs by sharing an anecdote from a January talk at the mosque, during which Tamerlan disrupted the event and insulted the speaker, accusing him of deviating from Islam by comparing the Prophet Muhammad to Martin Luther King Jr.

It was the second time that Tamerlan disrupted an event at the mosque because he felt that its religious message was too liberal, said the spokesman, Yusufi Vali, according to a report in The Boston Globe.

In disrupting the talk in January at the Islamic Society of Boston mosque in Cambridge, Tamerlan Tsarnaev’s shouted at a speaker: “You are a Kafir” — a nonbeliever, according to Yusufi Vali, a spokesman for the mosque. Tsarnaev went on to say the speaker was contaminating people’s minds and accused him of being a hypocrite. The congregation disagreed, according to Vali, and “shouted him out of the mosque” on Prospect Street. Tsarnaev also interrupted a talk last November when a speaker said it was fine for people to celebrate holidays such as Thanksgiving and July 4, in the same way you celebrate the birthday of the Prophet. Tsarnaev challenged him and the two talked after service. “The brother was angry, but he left,’’ Vali said.

The Islamic Society of Boston issued a news release on Monday afternoon detailing the organization’s interactions with the suspects, who it said were “neither members nor regular attendees” of religious services there.

The statement focused almost exclusively on Tamerlan, who the organization said had begun coming “intermittently” to weekly Friday Prayers and “occasionally” to daily services about a year ago. It said Dzhokhar “was rarely seen at the center, coming only occasionally for prayer.”

The statement included lengthy descriptions of the incidents in January and November when Tamerlan disrupted events at the mosque, leading the community there to reprimand and ostracize him.

On November 16, 2012, at our weekly congregational prayer, one of our preachers sermonized that it was appropriate to celebrate national holidays like July 4th and Thanksgiving, just like the birthday of the Prophet (Peace Be Upon Him). The older suspect stood up during the sermon and challenged the preacher, arguing that celebration of any holiday was not allowed in the faith. After the sermon ended and the congregational prayer was finished, the preacher met with the older suspect to share his opinion. The suspect repeatedly argued his viewpoint, and then left. On January 18, 2013, one of our preachers noted that Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was a great person remembered in history. The older suspect stood up, shouted and called him a “nonbeliever”; said that he was “contaminating people’s minds”; and began calling him a hypocrite. People of the congregation, in turn, shouted back at the older suspect, “Leave now!” Due to the congregation’s disapproval, he left the sermon. After the sermon and the congregational prayer ended, a few volunteer leaders of the mosque sat down with the older suspect and gave him a clear choice: either he stops interrupting sermons and remains silent or he would not be welcomed. While he continued to attend some of the congregational prayers after the January incident, he neither interrupted another sermon nor did he cause any other disturbances.

The statement said that no member of the mosque’s board or staff “ever interacted” with either Dzhokhar or Tamerlan, who it said “disagreed with the moderate American-Islamic theology of the I.S.B. Cambridge mosque.”

“Our mosque is one filled with attendees who are teachers, businessmen, doctors and lawyers, all of whom are committed to the public good,” the statement said. “While these suspects did express views counter to our mosque’s philosophy, they never expressed any hint of violent sentiments or behavior. If they had, the F.B.I. would have immediately been called.”

On Saturday, the mosque posted a long note on its front door, which was photographed and uploaded to Twitter by several people, including Steve Annear, a freelance journalist and contributor to Boston Magazine.

Here is the note about the bombing suspects on the door of the Islamic Society of Boston. They were guest s there. //t.co/vdv1ZWxagi — Steve Annear (@steveannear) 21 Apr 13

The note expressed shock and sadness at the bombing of the Boston Marathon and urged members of the congregation to contact the F.B.I. with any information they may have about the Tsarnaev brothers. The statement was also posted on the mosque’s Web site.