The memorial’s speakers, who included Mr. Biden and Senator Warren, struggled to comprehend the circumstances around Officer Collier’s death. He is thought to have been sitting in his cruiser when the Tsarnaev brothers, Tamerlan and Dzhokhar, approached his car from behind and shot him, the authorities believe.

“It is so difficult to understand why such a senseless, brutal act was perpetrated on such a gentle, caring young man,” said the M.I.T. police chief, John DiFava.

Photo

During an emotional address, Mr. Biden drew on his own experience of losing a child, and reflected broadly — and colorfully — on what had motivated the bombers to commit their terrorism.

“Why, whether it’s Al Qaeda,” asked Mr. Biden, “or two twisted, perverted, cowardly knockoff jihadis here in Boston, why do they do what they do?”

“They do it to instill fear,” Mr. Biden said. He later said, “We have suffered, we are grieving, but we are not bending.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Addressing the students present, Mr. Biden cited the diversity of M.I.T., as well as its intellectual firepower.

“You are their worst nightmare,” Mr. Biden said. “All the things these perverted jihadis — self-made or organized — all the things they fear.”

Sitting on an adjacent field after the service, David Cohen-Tanugi, 26, a graduate student in the materials science department, said the service had given the university a rare, communal chance to process the fact that it, too, was involved in the events that unfolded in Boston last week. “M.I.T. has a reputation as a very functional place, where people don’t spend much time thinking about pomp and circumstance, and fuzzy feelings,” Mr. Cohen-Tanugi said. “This has struck a chord in the M.I.T. community that’s a very hard chord to strike.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Leaving the service, Mariah Murray, 21, a senior studying mechanical engineering, said Officer Collier’s death had led many students to reflect differently on campus security officers — a group with whom this playful campus is sometimes at odds. “We do things like hacks, pranks, exploring parts of campus that we’re not meant to be on, almost like it’s a game,” Ms. Murray said. “I don’t think we realized how much they protect us.”

The service offered thousands of police officers — from Canada, from neighboring states and from communities all over New England — a chance to say goodbye to one of their own.

“Boston was under attack, and this poor kid was a victim of it,” said Detective Rick Corazzini, 59, of the Police Department in Lexington, Mass. “Everybody sort of did take this personally.”