The shaggy 19-year-old accused of carrying out the Boston Marathon bombing with his older brother "appears calm" in a panicked crowd, federal prosecutors allege in a criminal complaint filed Monday.

The complaint offers new details about last week's bombing and reveals that the suspect Dzokhar Tsarnaev has multiple gunshot wounds to the head, neck, legs and hand.

The accused bomber faces charges of use of a weapon of mass destruction and malicious destruction of property resulting in a death. If convicted of the federal charges, Tsarnaev could face the death penalty.

READ THE FULL CRIMINAL COMPLAINT

Earlier Monday, the FBI said that he "remains in serious condition" at Beth Israel hospital in Boston. A court magistrate came to his bedside for the arraignment.

The criminal complaint against Tsarnaev, a naturalized U.S. citizen of Chechen ethnicity living in Cambridge, Mass., includes sworn statements from an FBI agent.

Special Agent Daniel Genck described surveillance footage that shows the bombing suspects -- believed to be the Tsarnaev brothers, Dzokhar and his older brother, Tamerlan -- each carrying large backpacks near where two bombs exploded on Boylston Street last Monday.

A camera recorded the second bomber, believed to be Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, reacting to the first blast as he stood near a restaurant, according to Genck's affidavit.

"Virtually every head turns to the east (towards the finish line) and stares in that direction in apparent bewilderment and alarm," Genck said. "Bomber Two, virtually alone among the individuals in front of the restaurant, appears calm. He glances to the east and then calmly but rapidly begins moving to the west, away from the direction of the finish line."

The complaint also describes some of the violent events that took place across the Charles River, beginning Thursday night, that led to Tsarnaev's capture.

However, the document unsealed today doesn't contain details about the fatal shooting of MIT campus police officer Sean Collier, who was allegedly shot by one of the Tsarnaevs.

Instead, the complaint picks up again with the Tsarnaev brothers' alleged armed carjacking in Cambridge, which took place shortly after Collier was killed.

The carjacking victim told police that the man who stole his car took credit for the bombings.

"Did you hear about the Boston explosion?" a man said to the driver after reaching in his window and opening the car door. "I did that," he said while pointing a loaded firearm at the driver.

According to the complaint, the driver told police the carjacker forced him to pick up a second man. The two men, speaking in a foreign language, put something in the trunk of the stolen vehicle.

The victim moved to the passenger seat and gave the two men $45 from his wallet. The armed man drove the car to an ATM, where they tried to empty the victim's account. The victim escaped at their next stop, a gas station and convenience store on Memorial Drive in Cambridge.

The stolen car, reportedly a Mercedes SUV, was spotted by police soon after the carjacking in nearby Watertown.

Genck said that two improvised explosive devices were thrown from the stolen car and successfully exploded on Dexter Street and "the remnants of numerous exploded IEDs" were strewn on Laurel Street. Law enforcement later found three other bombs that didn't go off: one inside the abandoned stolen car and two on Laurel Street.

The complaint gives a fuller picture of the weapons allegedly carried by the suspects, as well as of the composition of the two bombs that rocked the marathon. The devices found in Watertown included an exploded IED from the scene of the shootout, which was held in the same type of name-brand pressure cooker as the one that injured many at the marathon.

The bombs used near the finish line "were low-grade explosives that were housed in pressure cookers" and were filled with BBs and nails. A green-colored hobby fuse ignited them.

Yesterday, the FBI searched Tsarnaev's dorm room at UMass-Dartmouth and found a "large pyrotechnic, a black jacket and a white hat of the same general appearance as those worn by Bomber Two" as well as BBs.

"Although our investigation is ongoing, today's charges bring a successful end to a tragic week for the city of Boston, and for our country," Attorney General Eric Holder said in a statement. "Our thoughts and prayers remain with each of the bombing victims and brave law enforcement professionals who lost their lives or suffered serious injuries as a result of this week's senseless violence."

The charges were pushed as the White House decided it would not charge Tsarnaev as an enemy combatant, a move that would have stripped Tsarnaev of many rights afforded in criminal court.

More charges could be filed against Tsarnaev, but the Massachusetts attorney general's office and the Middlesex County district attorney's office told HuffPost that no decision has been made yet.

READ THE FULL CRIMINAL COMPLAINT

Tsarnaev Complaint