Terrorist Tamerlan Tsarnaev left the country recently and returned a radically different man, according to a Boston man who knew both brothers.

The friend, who asked to remain anonymous, said Tsarnaev, 26, had disappeared for a while and when he returned, he was noticeably more religious — and he appeared to be influencing his younger brother, Dzhokhar, in that direction, too.

WNBC-TV reported Friday that Tamerlan was out of the country for about six months last year.

He left via Kennedy Airport in January 2012 and returned in July, the news outlet said. He was headed to Russia.

Family and friends say that they saw a dramatic rise in Tamerlan’s religious fervor dating to 2009 — and that he only got more radical as time passed.

The Russian government even warned the FBI about Tamerlan in 2011 “based on information that he was a follower of radical Islam and a strong believer.” Tamerlan, the Russians believed, had changed drastically since 2010 when he prepared to travel to the region to join “unspecified underground groups.”

Some who knew Dzhokhar saw signs the older brother’s radicalization was affecting his younger sibling.

The 19-year-old college student had always been focused on schoolwork and his grades — although he did like to party — said a friend who has known him for several years.

But when the friend crossed paths with Dzhokhar this month, after not having seen him for a year, there was a marked change.

“He didn’t care about school anymore, he was more focused on religion,” the friend said.

“His attitude was, it doesn’t matter if you are an engineer or whatever, it’s all about doing right, and life was full of cheating. He wasn’t the same at all.”

Tamerlan was no stranger to tragedy, but its possible effect on his radicalization remains unclear. A close friend, Brendan Mess, was brutally murdered two years ago in a crime that remains unsolved.

Albrecht Ammon, 18, lived in the same building in Cambridge as the Tsarnaevs and met them when they moved in.

“They acted like a normal family,” he said. But the older brother didn’t hesitate to share his political views, he said.

“He mentioned about how in the war of Afghanistan and Iraq, most casualties are innocent people gunned down by American soldiers,” said Ammon.

“He said America was a colonial power trying to take over the Middle East and Africa. He was very passionate about his beliefs,” the teen said.

Ammon said the conversation was respectful, even when he disagreed with Tamerlan. “I said that bombing civilians and justifying it under the Koran is wrong and he agreed with me. He said not all Muslims were like that,” said Ammon.

mmorales@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!