A terminal at Boston Logan International Airport as seen on Sept. 9, 2009. (Photo: Ben Mutzabaugh, USA TODAY)

Boston's Logan Airport is "open and flights are operating," Massachusetts Port Authority spokesman Matthew Brelis confirmed to Today in the Sky at 10 a.m. ET.

He said the airport is "operating under heightened security" and advised customers to check with their airlines for the status of their flights today before coming to the airport.

LATEST: Ongoing manhunt for Boston bombing suspect

UNCLE: 'Turn yourself in'

FULL COVERAGE: Boston Marathon suspects, victims

FLIGHT TRACKER: Is your flight on time?

Many in Boston, of course, might be unable to head to the airport today because of transit disruptions and lockdowns in some parts of the metro area.

Brelis said taxis had been coming to and from the airport this morning, though he said they were "in short supply" by 10 a.m. ET. Much of Boston's taxi service had been suspended for a portion of the morning, though the Boston Police Department said it had been restored as of 10:48 a.m. ET.

JetBlue, the busiest carrier at Boston Logan, is waiving change fees for Boston customers but says flights are continuing.

"At this time, Boston Logan International Airport (BOS) remains open for operations and we're running at a normal pace," JetBlue says in a statement to Today in the Sky. "We will continue to monitor the situation and will adjust as necessary. Our primary concern is the safety and well-being of our customers and crewmembers."

Most other big airlines serving Boston also have announced that they're waiving change fees for today's Boston flights. Scroll down for details.

AirTran

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Through April 22

AirTran says to rebook at AirTran.com

American Airlines

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Through April 21

More details: American

Delta Air Lines

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19-21

New travel window: Through April 24

More details: Delta

JetBlue

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Through April 22

Also: Customers can fly through the following airports as an alternate to Boston: Hartford, Providence, New York LaGuardia, New York JFK, Newark Libery, Newburgh-Stewart and Westchester County.

More details: JetBlue

Southwest Airlines

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Open

Rebook here: Southwest

Spirit Airlines

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Through April 30. If after April 30, the fare difference will apply but there will be no change fee

More details: Spirit

United Airlines

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: 24 hours from original departure; If after 24 hours, the fare difference will apply but there will be no change fee

More details: United

US Airways

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Through April 22. If after April 22, the fare difference will apply but there will be no change fee

More details: US Airways

Virgin America

Waiver covers flights booked for: April 19

New travel window: Through April 24

More details: Virgin America

TWITTER: You can follow me at twitter.com/TodayInTheSky

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/17vORbb