Dzhokhar Tsarnaev admitted to playing a role in the marathon bombings, which killed three people and wounded more than 260, and told federal agents that he and his brother were motivated by extremist Islamic beliefs, when he was interviewed Sunday at the hospital, law enforcement officials said.

Mr. Tsarnaev, who was recovering from gunshot wounds he received Friday while trying to elude the police, said that he and his brother had not been acting with any terrorist groups, the officials said, and told the investigators that they had learned about building explosive devices from Inspire, the online English magazine of the Qaeda affiliate in Yemen.

Photo

Now investigators will try to check Mr. Tsarnaev’s statements as they conduct a wide-ranging inquiry into the lives of the two brothers, speaking with people who knew them and looking at everything from items they left behind in their homes and, in the case of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, his dorm room, to the lengthy digital trail they left through their e-mails and posts on social media sites. Investigators are still interested in a trip that his brother, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, 26, made to Dagestan and Chechnya last year.

Tamerlan Tsarnaev was killed early Friday morning after he was shot by the police and struck by the car his brother was driving as the younger man escaped, law enforcement officials said.

One law enforcement official said that investigators were interested in learning whether Tamerlan Tsarnaev’s wife, Katherine Russell, knew anything about the bombings.

“At one point, we were looking very hard at her, but less so now,” the official said. “But we are still looking at her.”

A lawyer for Ms. Russell released a statement on Tuesday saying that reports about her husband and her brother-in-law’s involvement in the Boston Marathon bombing came as “an absolute shock.” The lawyer, Amato A. DeLuca, also said that Ms. Russell, who grew up in North Kingstown, R.I., and met Mr. Tsarnaev when she was a student at Suffolk University, was “doing everything she can to assist with the investigation.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Martin Richard, the 8-year-old boy killed in the bombings, was remembered at a private funeral with his immediate family on Tuesday morning. “This has been the most difficult week of our lives, and we appreciate that our friends and family have given us space to grieve and heal,” his parents, Bill and Denise, said in a statement.

And in Stoneham, Mass., roughly 12 miles outside Cambridge, hundreds of mourners attended a funeral Mass for Sean A. Collier, a campus police officer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was shot and killed last Thursday night.

A law enforcement official said that the brothers had been linked to Officer Collier’s shooting by a man they carjacked later Thursday night. The brothers told the carjacking victim that they had killed a police officer and committed the marathon bombings, the official said.

Photo

Investigators believe that the officer was killed in an attempt to get his gun, the official said, adding that there were indications that the men had tried — but failed — to remove it from its triple-lock holster.

When Dzhokhar Tsarnaev spoke to investigators on Sunday, officials said, he indicated that he and his brother had learned to make the pressure-cooker bombs that they used at the marathon from Inspire, the online Al Qaeda magazine.

The magazine’s first issue came out in mid-2010, and contained bomb-making instructions in articles with titles like “Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom.” Intelligence officials identifiedSamir Khan, a 24-year-old American, as the editor of the publication.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Khan, who grew up in Queens and North Carolina, proclaimed in the magazine in 2010 that he was “proud to be a traitor to America.” He was killed in the drone strike in Yemen in September 2011 that killedAnwar al-Awlaki, the radical Yemeni-American cleric who officials said was one of the Qaeda group’s top leaders and propagandists.

The brothers may have been planning the marathon attacks for several months. On Feb. 6, Tamerlan Tsarnaev bought fireworks at a Phantom Fireworks store in Seabrook, N.H., about an hour’s drive north of Boston, said William Weimer, the vice president of Phantom Fireworks, which is based in Youngstown, Ohio, and has 68 stores in 15 states.

“He came in and he asked the question that 90 percent of males ask when they walk into a fireworks store: ‘What’s the most powerful thing you’ve got?’ ” Mr. Weimer said in a telephone interview, adding that the store’s clerk had described the sale as “uneventful.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Tsarnaev settled on a reloadable mortar kit called a Lock and Load, which comes with a launch tube and shells, Mr. Weimer said. But Mr. Weimer said that even if the brothers had harvested all the powder from the shells Mr. Tsarnaev bought that day, he did not believe it would have yielded enough explosives to make the two pressure cooker bombs that exploded on Boylston Street and the other devices that the suspects had with them when they were chased by the police early Friday morning.

Mr. Weimer said that his company, which sold fireworks in 2010 to Faisal Shahzad, who unsuccessfully tried to detonate a car bomb in Times Square, had checked its records for Mr. Tsarnaev’s name as soon as it was made public, and had given the information to the F.B.I.

Photo

Elmirza Khozhugov, 26, the ex-husband of Tamerlan Tsarnaev’s younger sister, Ailina, said that Tamerlan Tsarnaev had been enamored of conspiracy theories, and that he was also concerned by the wars in the Middle East.

“He was looking for connections between the wars in the Middle East and oppression of Muslim population around the globe,” Mr. Khozhugov said in an e-mail. “It was very hard to argue with him on themes somehow connected to religion. On the other hand, he did not hate Christians. He respected their faith. Never said anything bad about other religions. But he was angry that the world pictures Islam as a violent religion.”

Dzhokhar Tsarnaev’s court-appointed lawyers took their first formal steps on Tuesday toward preparing his defense, filing a motion to request that the court provide them with additional expertise in death penalty cases.

Miriam Conrad, the head of the federal public defender’s office in Boston, asked Marianne B. Bowler, a federal magistrate judge, to appoint two lawyers “learned in the law applicable to capital cases.”

Outside the home of the Tsarnaev brothers’ parents in Makhachkala, Russia, friends of the family told reporters Tuesday afternoon that their mother, Zubeidat Tsarnaeva, had grown distraught after seeing a photograph of Tamerlan Tsarnaev on television.

Kheda Saratova, a well-known Chechen human rights activist and friend of the family, told reporters: “Please don’t torture this family, they want to wait awhile, they are in terrible grief. Please.”

“We must defend this family while the case is being investigated, so we can’t say anything for now,” she said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mrs. Tsarnaeva, who has given a number of interviews in recent days, walked out from behind her wearing a bright yellow head scarf, and made her way, through a scrum of photographers and reporters, to hail a taxi. “My son is just my son,” she said in English.