The process is long and challenging, but for those who lost limbs in the Boston Marathon blasts — at least 13 people, including two double amputees — there's a good chance for a quality life.

Medical workers aid an injured man at the 2013 Boston Marathon after the attacks Monday. (Photo: David L. Ryan, The Boston Globe, via AP) Story Highlights Rehab can take up to a year

Thanks partly to medical advances, a quality life is possible

One computerized, artificial limb for an above-the-knee amputee provides the ability to run

The process is long, arduous and challenging. But for those who lost limbs in the Boston bomb attacks — numbering at least 13 people as of Wednesday, including two double amputees — there can be a quality life ahead, say those in the military who re-assemble the hundreds damaged by wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

The Pentagon's aggressive efforts to advance the science of artificial limbs, treatment of complex blast wounds and rehabilitation of amputees during a decade of war has led to dramatic strides, military medical leaders say.

"Vigorous, active, healthy, satisfying lives are completely possible," says Cmdr. David Dromsky, an orthopedic surgeon at Naval Medical Center in San Diego. "We know that because we're privileged to see it on a daily basis."

"Don't lose hope," says John Fergason, chief prosthetist at the Army's Center for the Intrepid rehabilitative center in San Antonio. "Life will be different. Life is not over."

After a careful period of damage control, where doctors allow blast-frayed flesh to begin recovering, amputees can be fitted for a prosthesis in about eight weeks. Rehabilitation can last from six months to a year.

"The way people use them around here, it's almost like they had never lost their legs," says Army Staff Sgt. Christopher Walker, 29, whose left leg and both arms were amputated after a bomb attack in Afghanistan last year and is undergoing rehab at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center. "It's amazing."

Some tough pitfalls common to blast wounds are abnormal bone growth at the site of the amputation and something called "phantom pain," when there are uncomfortable or even painful sensations from the missing limb, doctors say.

And mental health can suffer, says Robert McLay, a Navy psychiatrist.

"The good news is that most people are pretty resilient," he says. "But that's not the case for everyone." Victims with lost limbs can be dealing with pain, depression, post-traumatic stress or brain injuries caused by the blast rattling the brain, he says.

One potential problem for the Boston victims will be whether the military's gold standard for treatment and devices will be available to them, given they will rely on private insurance plans that may have limited coverage.

"That is probably the great unknown," Fergason says. "How will these individuals cover the costs of taking care of these injuries? Because the costs don't ever go away. They're going to need prosthetic devices for the rest of their lives."

One computerized, artificial limb for an above-the-knee amputee — which include many of those injured in Boston — is waterproof, battery-operated, has a three-year warranty and provides the ability to run. Troops have used it to return to combat.

"It's a knee that can tell whether you're going uphill or downhill. It's a knee that can tell if it needs to stiffen up a little," Dromsky says.

But it costs $70,000 to $75,000, and it's unclear whether private insurance plans would pay for it, says Fergason, who has studied the issue.

"It's all across the board depending on what kind of coverage you have," he says, adding that it's not a provision that most people worry about in their medical insurance plans. "If you ask 10 people, 'Do you have coverage for a prosthetic device?' ... I'm going to guess most of them probably couldn't tell you."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/15mpDzF