Mr. Khadzhimuratov, 36, said he understood why investigators would want to take a look at him. Tamerlan Tsarnaev, along with his wife and daughter, stopped by Mr. Khadzhimuratov’s apartment a few weeks before the bombing, the last of several encounters. And long before coming to the United States in 2004, Mr. Khadzhimuratov was a bodyguard for Akhmed Zakayev, a prominent secular Chechen separatist leader who now lives in London.

Mr. Khadzhimuratov said that he was one of six bodyguards for Mr. Zakayev; and that he was shot by Russian security forces in 2001 while trying to evade capture and lost the use of his legs. The other bodyguards, he said, have been killed.

But Mr. Khadzhimuratov said he had been rattled by the growing intensity of the F.B.I. scrutiny, which has upset his wife, 32, and their daughter, 14, and son, 13. He said the visit from Mr. Tsarnaev in March, when they drank tea and talked about family, was like their handful of previous meetings.

“We talked about family, not religion or politics,” he said. He said he had no inkling that Mr. Tsarnaev had driven several times from his home in Cambridge, Mass., to New Hampshire to buy fireworks for the explosive powder used in the bombs or to shoot at a firearms range in Manchester — let alone that he would attack the marathon.

“We have nothing to hide,” said Mr. Khadzhimuratov, who has not hired a lawyer. “But they began very nice, saying they needed an expert on the North Caucasus. Now they treat me like a criminal. They push, push, push. They say, ‘Where do you think he made the bomb? It took 12 seconds to go off — how do you think they set off the bomb?’ ”

The F.B.I. declined to comment. But aggressive and accusatory questioning may simply reflect its determination to be absolutely certain that the bombing conspiracy did not extend beyond the Tsarnaev brothers. Investigators have found no link to foreign militant groups, despite Tamerlan Tsarnaev’s travel to Russia’s Caucasus region last year.

The homegrown theory received additional support on Thursday when officials confirmed a report by CBS News that Dzhokhar Tsarnaev had scribbled an explanation of the bombing before his arrest on April 19.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After the death of Tamerlan in a police shootout, Dzhokhar hid inside a neighbor’s boat and wrote with a pen on the inside of the hull that the attack was retribution for the wars the United States waged in Iraq and Afghanistan, according to two law enforcement officials. The note stated generally that an attack on one Muslim is an attack on all Muslims, one official said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In Senate testimony on Thursday, the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III, suggested that the evidence pointed to “homegrown violent extremists,” but he said investigators “continue in our ongoing efforts to identify any others who may be responsible.”

The note written on the boat, which is likely to become evidence at any trial for Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, fits with his statements to investigators that the brothers were inspired by calls for jihad against America, not the anti-Russian insurgency in the Caucasus.

But the F.B.I. has worked closely with Russian security officials to understand what Tamerlan did between January and July 2012 in Dagestan in southern Russia, where he reportedly sought to meet with militants.

And the Boston investigation is playing out at a time of especially tangled relations between the United States and Russia, typified by the announcement late Monday by Russian authorities that they had caught a C.I.A. officer trying to recruit a Russian intelligence source who specializes in the North Caucasus.

Glen E. Howard, president of the Jamestown Foundation, a research organization that focuses in part on the Caucasus, said Russian officials might have encouraged the F.B.I. to focus on Mr. Khadzhimuratov as an indirect way to sully his former boss, Mr. Zakayev, the target for years of Russian extradition appeals and alleged Russian assassination schemes.

“I have a fear that the F.B.I. may be led by the F.S.B. to go after people who are opponents of Russia but are not terrorists,” he said.

The Khadzhimuratovs’ quiet life in Manchester for the last eight years stands in contrast to the years that preceded it. Both grew up in Grozny, Chechnya’s capital, and they married when he was 20 and she was 16. He worked as a bodyguard for Mr. Zakayev from 1996 to 1999, he said, when Mr. Zakayev was a leader in the first Chechen war against Russia and then deputy prime minister of a short-lived government in Grozny.

After Mr. Zakayev left Russia and became an exiled leader of the Chechen independence movement, Mr. Khadzhimuratov was confronted by Russian security forces on Jan. 2, 2001, he said, and shot in front of his wife and young children. Family members bribed the police to take him from Chechnya to a hospital in neighboring Ingushetia; from there the family went to Azerbaijan, where they lived until 2004. That year, with the support of the United Nations refugee program, they came to Manchester.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Khadzhimuratov has been turned down repeatedly for a green card because of his previous association with the Chechen rebels, though his wife is an American citizen. Among the videos archived on Mr. Khadzhimuratov’s Russian YouTube page were a few that touched on Caucasus insurgency, including addresses by two militant leaders, Doku K. Umarov and Said Buryatsky, and video of a sniper attack on the police by militants in Dagestan.

But he and his wife say the F.B.I.’s attention has come as a shock, bringing back painful memories of being under official scrutiny in Chechnya years ago.

“I’m scared,” Ms. Khadzhimuratova said. “I just want to save my family.”