Boston bombing [Update]: Door-to-door manhunt locks down city

Authorities have shut down the region’s mass transit, banned much civilian aircraft from the skies, and ordered residents in Boston and nearby suburbs to stay indoors and remain vigilant.

The FBI initially said that it believed Dzhokar Tsarnaev may be driving a green four-door Honda Civic, but canceled the alert it had issued for the car. They then issued an alert for a gray Honda.

Boston bombing suspect Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, one of a pair of ethnic Chechen brothers who came to the United States a decade ago, has been in flight since a shootout with police in the early hours of Friday. His brother, Tamerlan, 26, was killed in the confrontation.

BOSTON — As family members called on him to surrender, a 19-year-old college student remained on the run Friday as thousands of police armed with rifles and driving armored vehicles combed the nearly deserted streets of a region on virtual lockdown.

“I was awoken at 12:50 this morning because I heard multiple explosions. I wasn’t sure what it was,” Shelly Levy, 52, of Watertown, director of support services at the Solomon Schechter Day School of Greater Boston. “It frankly sounded like explosions and gunshots. I heard a lot of sirens … it was just literally down the street. I couldn’t see from my window but it was a few blocks away. There were hundreds of police and FBI.”

A little before 9 a.m., officers in body armor were going door-to-door checking if families were safe. They looked in Levy’s basement and the basements of her neighbors.

“Sometimes you hear sirens in the night, you don’t think anything of it,” she said. “Because of what happened at the Boston Marathon, I knew it wasn’t something good.”

On Monday, twin bombs exploded at the finish line of the Boston Marathon, killing three people and wounding more than 170. On Thursday evening, investigators released images of the two suspects and asked the public for help in tracking them down in what they said is the most complex investigation in the city’s history.

At the latest briefing in the suburb of Watertown, Gov. Deval Patrick again urged residents to remain indoors. He said they should not allow anyone into their homes who is not a uniformed officer, fearing that the fleeing suspect would take hostages.

“The stay-indoors request remains in effect,” Patrick told reporters. “That is unchanged.... It is important that people remain indoors and not open the door. Keep the doors locked. Do not open unless there is a uniformed law enforcement officer on the other side requesting to come inside.”

Officials carried out a controlled explosion at the suspect’s home in Cambridge, a prelude to conducting a safe search of the building.

About a dozen people in FBI jackets entered the building on Norfolk Street, followed by a team in white protective suits. As a precaution, a blue tarpaulin was strung across the street in front of the building.

FULL COVERAGE: Boston Marathon attack

Superintendent and Colonel of the Massachusetts State Police Timothy P. Alben told reporters that officers had covered perhaps three-quarters of the Watertown area in a house-to house search.

“Be patient,” Boston Mayor Thomas Menino said. “We’re gonna get through this, we’ll be a stronger city as we move forward.”