Dominica continues to benefit from relations with the Federative Republic of Brazil.

The most recent initiative was a donation of medicines and medical supplies to the Ministry of Health on Wednesday, October 14th.

Over $23,000 worth of medicine and medical supplies were gifted to Dominica by the Ambassador of the Federative Republic of Brazil to Dominica, His Excellency Jose Marcos Viana.

It is not the first time Dominica has received aid from Brazil following natural disaster. Last time was in 2007 following Hurricane Dean.

His Excellency Jose Marcos Viana says Brazil is once again here to assist.

“Tropical Storm Erika caused great personal struggle to a lot of people in Brazil. People in Dominica lost their homes, loved ones and their lives. This donation of medicine from the Brazilian Government is a small contribution to help mitigate these natural disasters.”

“In such a very short period of to me, the actions that have resulted in the medical supplies being in Dominica in less than a month is really very symbolic and epitomizes the depth of the solidarity which is there and extended to us in Dominica by the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil,” stated Dominica’s Ambassador to the Federative Republic of Brazil, Jennifer Aird.

Representing the hon. Minister for Health was Dr. Martin Christmas who says the supplies come at a very critical time for the Ministry.

“It is at times like these that our resilience is put to the test and in the wake of such disasters when availability and accessibility of healthcare becomes an issue of paramount importance… It is at times like these when we recognize and truly appreciate those good neighbors…,” he said.

Hon. Minister for Foreign Affairs and CARICOM Affairs, Francine Baron is grateful for the partnership of the two countries.

“Tropical Storm Erika has brought out the best of our friends in the region. They have rallied very quickly to our aid and it underscores the need for countries like ours to have good relations with our friends in the region and internationally.”

Hon. Minister Baron also highlighted the scope of the relations between the two countries at the handing over ceremony.

She named a technical cooperation programme and bilateral agreements and listed rural reform, agriculture and training.

Dominica also benefits from visa free travel to Brazil.

The supplies include anti-tuberculosis and other medicines, gloves, masks and syringes.

Dominica established diplomatic relations with Brazil in 1986.