On Monday, 14th September 2015, H.E. James Chang, Ambassador of the Republic of China (Taiwan) presented a cheque in the sum of EC$268,820.00 (US$100,000) to Dr. Didacus Jules, Director General of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), at a ceremony held at the OECS Commission’s Headquarters in Saint Lucia.

The cheque represented a donation from the Government of the Republic of China (Taiwan) to the Government and people of the Commonwealth of Dominica, to assist with relief and rehabilitation efforts following the passage of Tropical Storm Erika.

In his opening remarks, Ambassador Chang expressed heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims who lost their lives, and to the people of the Commonwealth of Dominica in general: “We all understand that extreme climate change, increasing global warming and rising incidents of natural disasters have endangered all of our lives in one way or another. Taiwan as a member of the global village should make its efforts in the face of these global issues.” The Ambassador noted that the Republic of China (Taiwan) has been an active provider of humanitarian assistance globally, especially following natural disasters.

In his concluding remarks, Ambassador Chang wished the Commonwealth of Dominica a speedy recovery from the heavy damage which had resulted from Tropical Storm Erika. He thanked the OECS Commission for its cooperation in making the donation possible. The Ambassador expressed the hope that relations between the Republic of China (Taiwan) and the OECS will be further strengthened.

In accepting the cheque, the Director General conveyed the sincere appreciation of the Government and people of Dominica for the contribution. He informed that following the devastation of Tropical Storm Erika, the OECS Commission had been engaged in efforts to secure assistance for the rehabilitation of the country. In this regard, he expressed pleasure at the positive response of the Government of the Republic of China (Taiwan).

In closing, the Director General requested that Ambassador Chang convey to the Government of the Republic of China (Taiwan) the deep appreciation of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and the Government and people of the Commonwealth of Dominica for this humanitarian gesture. The Director General assured the Ambassador that the funds will be transferred immediately to the Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica in keeping with the urgency of the situation.