EVENT:

Erika became the fifth named storm of this year’s Atlantic Hurricane Season on August 24, 2015. Erika began impacting the CDEMA Participating States from Wednesday, August 26 and degenerated to a trough of low pressure on Saturday, August 29, 2015.

The centre of Tropical Storm Erika passed about 90 miles to the North of Dominica at its nearest point with the storm producing intense rainfall across the island. The Canefield Airport near the capital of Roseau, Dominica, recorded 12.64 inches of rain in a 12-hour period from Erika on Thursday, August 27. This resulted in severe flooding and landslides and wide spread damage across the island. As of September 1, 2015 the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) has confirmed 11 dead and 23 reported missing.

Following a preliminary assessment of the impact, the Prime Minister of Dominica declared nine (9) Special Disaster Areas on August 29, 2015. The Prime Minister’s address to the nation and declaration can be accessed at https://soundcloud.com/rooseveltskerrit

Special Disaster Areas

The Government of Dominica has declared nine (9) Special Disaster Areas. These are:

Petite Savanne

Pichelin

Good Hope

Bath Estate (Paradise Valley)

Dubique

Campbell

Coulibistrie San Sauveur

Petite Soufriere

A hotline has been established with the Office of Disaster Management (ODM) and the Dominica Red Cross to offer assistance to persons seeking information on family members. The number is 1 (767) 448-8280.

The Government of Dominica has established an account at the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank to receive contributions in support of its recovery and reconstruction efforts following the passage of Tropical Storm Erika.

The account details are as follows:

United States Dollars (USD)

Federal Reserve Bank (NY)

SWIFT: FRNYUS33

ECCB’s account number at the FED: 021083695

FFC Government of Dominica account 310301005

HIGHLIGHTS:

CDEMA initiates first rotation of CDAC and COST teams currently on the ground.

French Helicopter distributes relief supplies to areas inaccessible by road

Approximately 200 persons in eight shelters

Container of relief supplies from Antigua and Barbuda is en route to Dominica.

Caribbean Public Health Agency (CARPHA) briefs Chief Medical Officers in the region

British vessel, RFA Lyme, carrying medical supplies expected to arrive in Dominica by Wednesday, September 2nd, 2015

IMPACT

Casualties

Dead and Missing

As of September 1st, 2015, the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) has confirmed 11 dead and 23 reportedly missing.

Homeless

574 persons

Evacuees

600 evacuated from Petit Savanne

Shelters and shelterees

8 shelters are opened with approximately 200 shelterees.

Numbers in the shelters are continuously decreasing as persons are opting to stay with family.

Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis

Damage assessment and needs analysis are ongoing. Data is currently being collated at the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC).

Infrastructure

To date 52 houses have been reported as destroyed, and 89 damaged

Communications have been significantly hampered

Major damage to roadways and bridges has resulted in several communities being cut off.

Transport

Roseau southwards to Soufriere is accessible.

Roseau to Loubiere to Bellevue is accessible.

Roseau, northwards along the west coast to Batalie is accessible.

Four wheeled drive vehicles can access Portsmouth via that route.

There are bypasses at Layou, Macoucherie and Batalie. However, the Batalie bypass is inaccessible.

There are diversions at Coulibistrie.

From Roseau to Pond Case to Castle Bruce, Kalinago Territory unto Marigot is accessible.

Northwards, from Portsmouth to Marigot is accessible and Portsmouth to Capuchin is accessible.

Portsmouth to Vielle Case and Penville are also accessible.

Police/Military Facilities

Police headquarters are reachable via cell phones.

**Ports of entry

Melville Hall’s airport suffered damage and remains closed to commercial flights.

The Canefield airport is operational for helicopter and small aircraft use.

All sea ports remain functional and open.

Utilities

Electricity The Government of Dominica has reported that approximately 45% of the area is without power.

REGIONAL ACTIONS:

The Regional Response Mechanism (RRM) remains activated. The RRM is an arrangement for the coordination of disaster response among CDEMA Participating States, and Regional and International Agencies. The RRM is coordinated by CDEMA through the Regional Coordination Centre in Barbados.

Deployment, quantification of needs and priorities are ongoing and are being coordinated by the CARICOM Disaster and Assessment Coordination (CDAC) team on the ground. The National Emergency Operations Centre is also being supported by the CARICOM Operational Support Team (COST). Additionally, CDEMA has initiated its first rotation of the CDAC and COST teams to relieve those deployed in the immediate aftermath of the event.

Currently, there are an estimated 100 personnel deployed to Dominica. These include Search and recovery teams, military personnel supporting the distribution of relief supplies, operations coordination, damage and assessment and medical services.

The teams have been drawn from Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, British Virgin Islands, Grenada, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Lucia, St. Kitts and Nevis and Trinidad and Tobago.

UPDATES ON PLEDGES AND SUPPORT

CDEMA Participating States

Antigua and Barbuda: A container of relief supplies was dispatched to Dominica on Monday night (August 31) The Government of Antigua and Barbuda has committed an immediate US$100, 000 and relief experts to the Government of Dominica.

Barbados:

The Coast Guard Vessel HMS Trident continues to support the movement of personnel and supplies and will depart Barbados tonight, September 1, Sunday. Among the personnel on the vessel tonight will be one staff member of the CDEMA Coordinating Unit who is being deployed to support coordination on the ground.

Saint Lucia:

Government of Saint Lucia continues to support the transit of essential personnel and relief supplies from its ports to Dominica.

Trinidad and Tobago:

Helicopters used in the early stages of the response have completed the initial hours pledged and are now on standby for further deployment as necessary.

Please See Annex 1 for summary of pledges and support by CDEMA Participating States

Regional Institutions Support

Caribbean Public Health Agency (CARPHA) called a meeting of Chief Medical Officers (CMO) in the region to brief them on the current situation in the health sector in Dominica.

University of the West Indies has placed six engineers on standby who are experienced in assessment in infrastructural damage and flooding, public health, water supplies and water resource management.

Please See Annex 2 for summary of pledges and support by Regional Institutions Support

Development Partner/Non-CDEMA Participating States

Government of France: A French Helicopter is distributing relief supplies to areas that are inaccessible by road.

United Kingdom: The British vessel, RFA Lyme, carrying medical supplies and 21 marines to support the relief effort is expected to arrive in Dominica by Wednesday, September 2, 2015.

United Development Fund: UNDP has indicated that US$50, 000 will be made accessible from tomorrow, September 2, to assist with relief support.

Please See Annex 3 for summary of pledges and support by Development Partner/Non-CDEMA Participating States

CDEMA is coordinating the Regional Response Mechanism and providing direct support to Dominica.

CONTACT DETAILS: The CDEMA CU 24-hour contact number 1(246) 434-4880