Government has spent between five and six million dollars to assist victims of Tropical Storm Erika.

This was revealed by the Chairperson of the Social Services and Welfare Ministerial Committee, Hon Justina Charles.

The Social Services and Welfare Subcommittee was appointed by Cabinet to assist in the recovery and rehabilitation exercise.

Hon Charles outlined some of the duties of the subcommittee.

“I must say that our terms of reference included assessment of damaged personal effects to individuals and households as a result of the disaster, assess for the support of the displaced families, assess for support for subsistence farmers, assessment of homes for repair, determine income support to affected and qualified individuals and revision of the role of the National Employment Prrogramme as it relates to the recovery effort.”

The subcommittee collaborated with key stakeholders in the provision of psychosocial support to those housed at the Grand Bay Community and Youth Centers, the Springfield Guest House and private homes.

Approximately 191 families were evacuated from Petite Savanne after the passage of Tropical Storm Erika.

Hon Charles gave a breakdown of monies spent on guesthouses that accommodated the people of Petite Savanne.

She listed, “Springfield Guesthouse for four and a half months, we spent $93,113.55; St. Aimie’s Guesthouse for nine months, we spent $270,000; Mr Clean’s Guesthouse, we spent $155,250, and at Kent Anthony’s Guesthouse we spent $180,000.”

In addition to meeting the cost of housing the residents of Petite Savanne, Government also contributed to the cost of food. The bill totals $1,111,135.

Hon Charles stated that Cabinet took a decision to aid families with a displacement allowance. She gave details.

“The head of the household is the person considered and has the responsibility to ensure that all the members benefit. We decided that households with 1-3 members would get $350 monthly, households with 4-6 members would get $600 and households with seven or more members would get $750 monthly.

“That began in January so from January to June, Government paid out to 345 families the sum of $946, 650 as displacement allowance,” Minister Charles reported.