By JOY BLACKBURN (Senior/Investigative Reporter)

Published: August 27, 2015

ST. CROIX - Gov. Kenneth Mapp on Wednesday urged residents to take the necessary steps to protect themselves as Tropical Storm Erika pays a call on the territory today.

"We ask you all to stay safe, stay dry as much as possible and please make the appropriate decisions to protect your life, your family, your property and your businesses," Mapp said during a press conference at Government House in Christiansted Wednesday.

Government offices are closed today and Mapp said a decision about opening on Friday will be made later tonight or early Friday.

Erika, expected to make her closest swipe at the territory later today, will be the second tropical cyclone to threaten the V.I. this week.

Tropical Storm Danny dissipated into a remnant low before it arrived earlier this week, bringing some thunderstorms and rain. Mapp said that local agencies remain prepared after getting ready for Danny.

At its 11 p.m. update Wednesday, the National Hurricane Center was predicting Erika would remain a tropical storm when it neared the territory, although it also noted there was a chance that Erika, too, could degenerate into a trough in the next day or so.

Potential flooding and shelters

Mapp urged those who live in low-lying and flood-prone areas to take their families to the shelters that opened Wednesday night across the territory.

He said there is no shame in going to a shelter and cautioned against staying in a situation that could get dicey if flooding occurs.

"Rescuers and responders will not be sent out at the height of the gale force winds or the torrent of water and rain to rescue folks. We cannot put their lives in danger," he said, urging people to make informed decisions about where they ride out the storm.

He said shelters are open on St. John at Guy Benjamin Elementary School in Coral Bay and at Julius Sprauve School in Cruz Bay; on St. Thomas at the Knud Hansen Complex in Hospital Ground and on St. Croix at the Herbert Grigg Home.

The V.I. Health Department also has opened its Special Needs Shelters at the Charles Harwood Memorial Complex on St. Croix and at Schneider Hospital on St. Thomas.

The Special Needs Shelters are for persons needing medical assistance during emergency evacuation situations. They are for those who have physical or mental conditions that require medical or nursing oversight that cannot be accommodated in a general population shelter.

V.I. government offices

Mapp ordered government offices closed today and gave all non-essential government employees administrative leave for the day.

The governor encouraged private employers who can to do the same and not have their employees come to work today - although he noted that decision is up to the employer.

He said he did not want to put people "into harm's way."

Essential government workers and first responders who have received deployment orders are to adhere to their schedules, he said.

The governor also signed an executive order on Wednesday deputizing all executive branch peace officers as law enforcement officers to perform public safety functions as required until noon on Friday, unless the order is extended.

Officials plan to make a decision late tonight or early Friday on whether to reopen government offices on Friday.

Mapp said officials will assess conditions, the amount of rain, and how extensive power outages are when they make the decision.

"We'll ask you to listen out so we can tell you very early Friday morning whether the government will reopen or it will not," he said. "So you'll have to stay tuned for that."

No curfew - for now

At Wednesday's press conference, Mapp said there were no current plans to implement a curfew, saying there was "no need" for that.

As of press time this morning, no curfew had been ordered.

Ports and ferry service

The U.S. Coast Guard, which is in charge of whether the territory's seaports stay open, anticipated closing the territory's seaports at midnight last night.

The V.I. Port Authority put out a statement noting that the Coast Guard takes the lead in closing and reopening the ports, although that statement said that the seaports would close to all vessels at 6 a.m. today.

The suspension of port activities and port traffic - Port Condition Zulu - will stay in effect until otherwise directed by the Coast Guard Captain of the Port.

The ports are typically reopened once a storm has passed and Coast Guard teams inspect the ports to ensure there are no storm-related hazards.

Airports

Mapp said at his press conference that all V.I. airports would likely close at 9 a.m. today, except for the operations of emergency aircraft, the V.I. National Guard, U.S. military flights and Hurricane Hunter flights.

The Port Authority, though, put out a statement saying that it will make an assessment and determine if the airports will be open today.

A number of airlines had already canceled flights.

American Airlines did plan to operate its 8:10 a.m. departure today from St. Thomas, but had cancelled its midday and night flights, according to Port Authority spokeswoman Monifa Brathwaite.

Each airline makes its own decisions on flight cancellations, so passengers can check with their airlines.

Erika

The exact track Erika will take and the times the territory is likely to feel the effects of the passing storm seemed to change slightly with every update from the National Hurricane Center on Wednesday.

Mapp cautioned, though, that once conditions deteriorate, they will likely go downhill fast.

"This is a fast-moving storm, and so we expect the deterioration to be rapid," he said.

He urged residents to get final preparations in place and to stay safe.

The people of the territory, he said, "are hurricane-hardened and have full experience," and should get through Erika "with flying colors."

- Contact Senior/Investigative Reporter Joy Blackburn at 714-9145 or email jblackburn@dailynews.vi.