The Ministry of Health and Environment has confirmed an outbreak of gastroenteritis on the rise since the passage of Tropical Storm Erika on August 27, 2015.

Chief Medical Officer, Dr. David Johnson, confirmed a total of 153 cases from August 28, 2015.

The most affected areas are the Portsmouth, St. Joseph and Roseau health districts.

He reported, “Clearly Tropical Storm Erika...affected our water supply so areas from where persons normally [sourced] potable water including pipe-borne water have been affected. We anticipated an increased risk of persons coming down with gastroenteritis. We’ve been monitoring the trend and we can say that it increased sharply from the week ending September 12th.”

Consequently, the Ministry has heightened its public health response including its public education campaign which was ongoing before the passage of Tropical Storm Erika. All health districts have stepped up surveillance and management of the illness.

“We are going to intensify what we’re doing on the ground; we realise that we have to focus more on what we refer to as direct interventions. We want our public, primary, environmental healthcare personnel and health promotion department to be on the ground in the communities to teach persons exactly how to make water safe.

“We are doing a number of things with regards to public education which is good but we now have to revisit our strategies to ensure that the message is getting out there to the [community],” Dr. Johnson said.

Gastroenteritis is a condition that causes irritation and inflammation of the stomach and intestines. It is caused by eating food or drinking water contaminated by a bacteria or virus or improper hand washing, especially after using the toilet.

Symptoms of gastroenteritis include vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhoea, upset stomach and stomach cramps.

“You should not be drinking water directly from any river or spring at this time. It is not safe to do this. We are saying that you should be boiling or chlorinating your water.”

Dr. Johnson adds that although the pipe-borne water has been treated, the Ministry of Health cannot yet confirm that it is 100% safe to drink at this time.