Message: Dominica: Evacuation of residents of Petit Savanne. Prime Minister declared nine 9 Special Disaster Areas.

EVENT:

Tropical Storm Erika became the fifth named storm of this year’s Atlantic Hurricane Season on August 24, 2015. Erika began impacting the CDEMA Participating States from Wednesday, August 26 and degenerated to a trough of low pressure on Saturday, August 29, 2015. The Canefield Airport near the capital of Roseau, Dominica, recorded 12.64 inches of rain in a 12-hour period from Erika on Thursday, August 27. This resulted in severe flooding and landslides and wide spread damage across the island. As of August 28, 2015 twenty persons have been confirmed dead and several others were reported missing (source Prime Minister’s briefing). The Government of Dominica has commenced evacuation of residents of Petit Savanne to Roseau via Scotts Head. The Prime Minister declared nine (9) Special Disaster Areas. The Prime Minister’s address to the nation and declaration can be accessed at https://soundcloud.com/rooseveltskerrit

Dominica

Impact

The centre of Tropical Storm Erika passed about 90 miles to the North of Dominica at its nearest point with the storm producing intense rainfall across the island. The Canefield station recorded 12.64 inches of rain in a 12-hour period from Erika on Thursday, August 2015. Heavy rains caused flash flooding which affected most parts of the island.

A hotline has been established with the Office of Disaster Management (ODM) and the Dominica Red Cross to offer assistance to persons seeking information on family members. The number is 1 (767) 448-8280.

Additionally, the Government of Dominica has established an account at the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank to receive contributions in support of its recovery and reconstruction efforts following the passage of Tropical Storm Erika.

The account details are as follows:

United States Dollars (USD)

Federal Reserve Bank (NY)

SWIFT: FRNYUS33

ECCB’s account number at the FED: 021083695

FFC Government of Dominica account 310301005

Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis

Damage assessment and needs analysis are ongoing. Data is currently being collated at the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC).

Declaration of Special Disaster Areas

The Government of Dominica has declared nine (9) Special Disaster Areas. These are:

Petite Savanne

Pichelin

Good Hope

Bath Estate (Paradise Valley)

Dubique

Campbell

Coulibistrie

San Sauveur

Petite Soufriere

The Government has reported that search and rescue was conducted in the affected areas. Access to a number of communities has been restored and injured persons have been airlifted to the Princess Margaret Hospital. Support is being organised to secure transportation via sea for coastal communities.

Casualties

Dead and Missing

As of August 28, 2015, twenty persons have been confirmed dead and several others are reported missing (source Prime Minister’s briefing). The Government has also reported 574 persons are homeless, 300 evacuated and 267 in shelters.

Infrastructure

To date 48 houses have been reported as destroyed, and 84 damaged

Communications have been significantly hampered

Major damage to roadways and bridges has resulted in communities being cut off.

Most of the west coast is reachable up to Roseau to Mero, Roseau to Champaigne and Loubiere to Bellevue in the South, South West and from Roseau through Antrim to Pond Casse through Formel to Castle Bruce through Kalinago Territory to Marigot through to Portsmouth.

Ports of entry

Melville Hall airports suffered damage and remain closed to commercial flights.

The Canefield airport is operational for helicopter and small aircraft use.

All sea ports remain functional and open.

Utilities

Electricity

The Government of Dominica has reported that approximately 45% of the area is without power. Areas without electrical power include Mero to Campbell, beyond Snug Corner, Soufriere to Scott's Head, East Coast including Petite Soufriere/Good Hope all the way to the Kalinago Territory.

Water

The water company has restored pipe-borne water supply to 50% of the island.

Communications

All FM radio stations are currently operational.

Telephone

The telephone service providers have reported that 50% of the island has communication.

Sectoral information

Health

Three health Facilities are operational. 7 health centres are non-operations, 3 are undetermined as there has been no contact, and 10 health centres are operational.

Agricultural

Major loss of livestock in the Castle Bruce area (cattle and pigs) and crops.

Tourism

The Government of Dominica has reported preliminary figures of damages at EC $4,983,900.00 excluding scenic spots.

National Actions

The National Emergency Operations Centre remains activated

Search and rescue and recovery efforts are ongoing

Relief operations are ongoing

Damage assessments is ongoing in all sectors

Clearing of roads has commenced in some areas.

Immediate needs

Through the Regional Response Mechanism (RRM) support for the immediate needs identified at this time continues. These include Emergency Operations Support, search, rescue and recovery efforts. Additionally, the RRM is also addressing the needs request for civil and geo-technical engineers to support assessment of soil, roads and bridges.

Relief supplies have been requested and these are currently being quantified. This support is especially for persons in the affected interior communities who are presently cut off from other areas.

REGIONAL ACTIONS:

The Regional Response Mechanism (RRM) remains activated. The RRM is an arrangement for the coordination of disaster response among CDEMA Participating States, and Regional and International Agencies. The RRM is coordinated by CDEMA through the Regional Coordination Centre in Barbados.

The CDEMA Executive Director, Mr. Ronald Jackson led a response mission into Dominica on Friday August 28, 2015. The team met with the Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit and Disaster Management personnel for briefings and to provide policy advice and guidance on the relief and response operations as well as next steps to guide CARICOM support other external assistance as necessary. The CDEMA mission was also part of an aerial reconnaissance which has provided a better picture of the damage to the affected area. Mr. Jackson returned to Barbados on August 29, 2015.

Further to that deployment, quantification of needs and priorities are ongoing and are being coordinated by the CARICOM Disaster and Assessment Coordination (CDAC) team on the ground. The EOC Coordination is also being supported by the CARICOM Operational Support Team (COST). Additional CDAC and COST members are being deployed in Dominica over the course of the next two days to increase capacity to conduct these assessments. Personnel will be deployed from Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, Montserrat, St. Lucia and Trinidad.

Antigua and Barbuda: Two (six member person) Search and Rescue Teams were deployed on Sunday, August 30.

Barbados: Government of Barbados has mobilized a Coast Guard Vessel for deployment on Sunday along with one (six member person) Search and Rescue Team on Sunday, August 30th. One other six-member team remains on standby for deployment. In addition, 2 cadet officers are on standby for deployment to provide support in Emergency Operations.

They have also indicated that they have provided support to PAHO. The Barbados Chamber of Commerce has initiated a drive to collect donations for Dominica and public pledges have been made.

Grenada: Government of Grenada has committed to providing a petrologist to support the damage assessment process in Dominica.

Montserrat: Personnel from the Police and Fire Services and Cadets are also on standby for deployment on Tuesday, September 1st, 2015. Technical Emergency Operations support from Montserrat is also being deployed to Dominica.

Saint Lucia: Personnel from the Polices and Fire Services have been deployed. Transportation was also provided for Dominica Chief Medical Officers and two PAHO persons. St Lucia has also been facilitating the air-bridge to Dominica.

Trinidad and Tobago: Two helicopters have been provided for 116 hours of aircraft flying time.

Regional Security System

The Regional Security System (RSS) is supporting the request made by the Government of Dominica for the provision of fifty (50) police and sea assets to support on the ground relief operations and coastal communities.

REGIONAL/INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS PLEDGES/SUPPORT

A meeting of the Eastern Caribbean Donor Partner Group for Disaster Management (ECDPGDM) was held at the CDEMA headquarters in Barbados on Saturday August 29, 2015. The second meeting of the ECDPGDM will be held at the CDEMA headquarters in Barbados on Monday, August 31, 2015. Pledges and indication of support from regional and international partners are outlined below:

Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) was formally contacted by the Prime Minister of Dominica to access the Emergency Relief Grant. This grant of US$200,000 is to be administered through CDEMA. CDB is in discussion with the Government of Dominica on other medium term assistance

CARICOM Development Fund has stated that a US$20,000 grant is available for support and could be mobilised based on needs identified.

Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology (CIMH) through a request from the Government of Dominica will deploy meteorological equipment to facilitate the re-operationalisation of both airports. The deployment of the equipment along with one technician is being supported by the Barbados Defence Force.

Caribbean Public Health Agency (CARPHA) has offered its support in the areas of environmental health, epidemiology, surveillance, vector control, and laboratory services.

University of the West Indies has committed to provide geo-technical and civil engineers to support assessment of soil, roads and bridges.

Government of Canada has indicated that an expandable purse is available based on the official request and needs identified from Dominica and this will be channelled through IFRC.

European Union has indicated that €300,000 would be made available and this would be based on needs identified from the Government of Dominica. The EU in collaboration with the World Bank will be supporting the Post disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). They further indicated that technical assistance could also be provided through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism.

The Government of France has pledged 10hrs of airlift support to Dominica.

The Government of the United Kingdom has indicated £300,000 has been provisionally allocated based on needs identified. The ATPM Vessel is currently available for deployment to Dominica if necessary.

Government of the United States of America has indicated that an emergency grant of US$50,000 is available to support humanitarian assistance. This would require a formal request and would also be based on needs identified from the Government of Dominica. These funds will be channelled through the International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC).

The IFRC is currently in Dominica coordinating relief efforts in conjunction with the National Emergency Operations Centre.

One USAID/OFDA consultant is on the ground and five additional team members will arrive by August 31 to coordinate and undertake assessments. Additional funds may be made available as determined by the outcome of the assessment.

Government of the US Virgin Islands was formally contacted by the Chief Fire Officer, and has pledged support through the use of Search of Rescue teams, all terrain vehicles and a front end loader.

Government of Venezuela has provided relief support which is managed through the NEOC.

Government of Cuba has provided relief support which is managed through the NEOC.

United Nations Agencies

The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) is providing communications equipment along with two personnel. The personnel and equipment have arrived in Barbados. Specifically ITU will provide 15 Iridium SAT Phones and 4 Broadband Global Area Network (BGAN) terminals with their accessories and peripherals. It is anticipated that they will support the communication links with some of the isolated areas. As part of the sub-regional focal point arrangement with Barbados, the delivery of personnel and supplies is being supported by the Barbados Defence Force.

PAHO indicated that a team member who was on the ground in Dominica during the passage of Erika supported the initial assessment of health facilities in the immediate aftermath of the storm. PAHO also responded to the requests of the Ministry of Health through the identification of pathologists and psychological counsellors who are on standby for deployment. Two members of the PAHO disaster response teams were deployed from Barbados and arrived in Dominica today to support the ongoing health sector assessment efforts. PAHO has also provided medical supplies which include pharmaceuticals gloves, syringes, nets, and nebulisers.

UNDP stated that US$100,000 could be made available and this will be informed by the determination of the level of the disaster and needs expressed by Dominica. UNDP can also activate a SURGE team on demand and in consideration of the scale of the event to support effective country office response.

UNFPA has indicated that up to US$50,000 could be made available upon request and needs identified. Technical support may be provided for sexual and reproductive health, psychosocial support and counselling. Dignity kits are also available for the women

UNICEF has indicated that five persons trained in the Return to Happiness Programme are on standby in Saint Lucia for deployment if required. These personnel will be working with children. US$50,000 is also available dependent on specified children’s needs. UNICEF has also indicated that they would provide education kits to support the start of schools as well as psychosocial support for children.

UNICEF will provide 500 boxes of adult hygiene kits, 100 boxes of infant hygiene kits and 80 cartons of water purification tablets. As part of the sub-regional focal point arrangement with Barbados, the delivery of personnel and supplies is being supported by the Barbados Defence Force.

UNOCHA has indicated that the Under-Secretary General of the United Nations has offered humanitarian assistance to the Government of Dominica.

UN Women has offered to provide gender experts for the needs assessment. Once assessments are completed the organisation can look into support in Ending Violence Against Women (EVAW) prevention.

World Bank stated that the Government of Dominica had written to the World Band to access the DVRP crisis window which could make US$1 million available. The World Bank also indicated support for the Post disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), and will be facilitating the deployment of four (4) engineers from Guadeloupe.

CDEMA is coordinating the Regional Response Mechanism and providing direct support to Dominica.

CONTACT DETAILS: The CDEMA CU 24-hour contact number 1(246) 434-4880