A woman walks her dog on the beach on a cloudy day on Aug. 27, 2015, the South Beach area of Miami Beach, Fla. (Photo: Alan Diaz, AP)

MIAMI — The decision to prepare for a hurricane in this southern city usually comes down to whether the person lived through the horror of Hurricane Andrew.

Those who witnessed the destruction of that 1992 storm have been closely watching the approach of Tropical Storm Erika and are taking the threat seriously.

“The people who've been here a long time know the routine and know what to do,” said JoBeth Carr, 61, a retired accounting clerk who has lived in Miami her whole life. “I’ve already started my generator, I got new flashlights, we filled our cars with gas.”

For those who have moved to the area since then, or who weren’t yet born when Andrew came ashore, Erika appears to be just another false alarm.

“It’s never that big a deal,” said James Dixson, 21, a warehouse manager in the suburb of Doral. “Ninety-five percent of the storms are going to come at us and then they turn away. It’s just another storm where everybody freaks out, another excuse to skip work or school or to party.”

RELATED: Tropical Storm Erika drenches Puerto Rico after devastating Dominica; Florida next?

Despite the widespread apathy, Florida officials aren't taking any chances. Gov. Rick Scott issued a state of emergency for every county in the state Friday morning, and Miami-Dade County officials planned to contact the roughly 2,000 people on its special needs registry to see if they need assistance.

A life guard station displays the yellow, Medium Hazard, and the purple, Dangerous Marine Life, warning flags on Aug. 27, 2015, in the South Beach area of Miami Beach, Fla. (Photo: Alan Diaz, AP)

The Coast Guard station in Miami is moving its larger response boats out of the storm's path and is planning to send aircraft over the waters south of Florida to alert boaters to the oncoming threat.

Coast Guard spokesman Lt. Cmdr. Gabe Somma said he was impressed how well federal, state and local government agencies have been working together this week despite how rarely they've had to shift into hurricane gear in recent years.

But he worries about the massive number of South Florida residents who have no such training and no experience with big, damaging storms.

"There are a lot of people here in Florida who have never experienced a hurricane," Somma said. "Even if this storm doesn't make landfall, we know it's going to kick up some serious surf and we don't want anyone getting sucked out by those rip currents. That's a very real threat even if the storm doesn't come ashore."

Miami-Dade County Emergency Management Coordinator Curt Sommerhoff said even his own team suffers from a lack of hurricane experience. He estimated that half his staff was not around during the tumultuous 2004 and 2005 seasons, when Florida was hit by hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan, Jeanne, Dennis, Katrina and Wilma.

But he said the team has the advantage of improved tools, including a system that can better determine what neighborhoods need to be evacuated. They have also established new private-sector partners that can, for example, bring in mobile cellular towers to improve reception.

If the storm stays on its current track, Sommerhoff said the county would open its emergency operations center Saturday morning. "There's a lot of uncertainty with the forecast," he said. "Without knowing a lot in regards to the timing of impact right now, all we can really do is work to coordinate with our agencies and start to prepare."

The forecast from the National Hurricane Center has been constantly shifting in recent days, moving Erika's track from a direct hit to a near miss and changing its expected intensity from a tropical storm to a Category 1 hurricane and back again.

The latest forecast from the center Friday morning said the storm is expected to weaken and could even dissipate in the next 12 to 24 hours. But as Millie Pagan knows all too well, storms can change at the last minute.

Pagan, 50, is a native of Puerto Rico who moved to Miami in 1988. With a lifetime of hurricane experience under her belt, she checked in on her 30-year-old daughter this week to make sure she was ready.

"I've always trained my children to be ready, and she was," Pagan said. "She showed me her batteries, her canned food, her bottled water. And, of course, her red wine. You can drink that warm."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1F3btB5