2 September 2015 - 9:45am Premier and Minister of Finance, Dr. the Honourable D. Orlando Smith, OBE has joined the international community in a demonstration of solidarity for the island of Dominica, and has pledged US$100,000.00 towards relief efforts on behalf of the Government of the Virgin Islands.

Premier Smith stated that while the British Virgin Islands was spared, the Government wanted to reach out in a tangible way to the Government and people of the Commonwealth of Dominica.

The Premier reiterated that residents should continue supporting any fundraising efforts that are organised to assist those affected by Tropical Storm Erika. He said that a number of civic and other organisations in the BVI have galvanized themselves to provide significant support, supplies and assistance to the country.

He said, “We are very proud of their initiative and generosity, and want to encourage as much support as possible. We are a giving people and as part of the Caribbean community we must do our part to help in rebuilding Dominica.”

Premier Smith added that the Government is also partnering with community organisations to transport much needed supplies to Dominica.

Following the passage of the storm, Premier Smith issued a statement of condolence to the Government and people of Dominica, and a rallying call to the BVI community to aid in the relief efforts organised to provide assistance to the country.

#

NOTE (S) TO EDITORS:

Tropical Storm Erika dumped in excess of ten inches of rainfall over a six-hour period on August 27 and caused mudslides and widespread damage. The storm devastated the island leaving over 20 people dead, and over 50 missing. Several communities remain cut off from the rest of the island while a number of locations have been declared special disaster areas. Residents of the community of Petite Savanne have been ordered to evacuate with immediate effect.

AUTHOR

Nadia James-Harris

Information Officer II

Premier’s Office

Telephone: 468-3701 ext. 2076

Email: njames-harris@gov.vg