Relief coordination underway in aftermath of Tropical Storm Erika

Geneva, 3 September 2015 – ITU has deployed emergency telecommunication equipment in Dominica, which was hit by Tropical Storm Erika on 27 August. Heavy rains, severe flooding and landslides wreaked widespread damage across the island in the Lesser Antilles region of the Caribbean Sea.

The emergency telecommunication equipment includes satellite phones, Broadband Global Area Networks, solar chargers, laptops and accessories, which are being used to support relief and coordination efforts.

“I express my sincere condolences to the people and Government of Dominica following loss of life and widespread destruction caused by high winds, flooding and mudslides,” said ITU Secretary-General Houlin Zhao. “ITU stands ready to support Dominca in its hour of need and other Member States in their efforts to provide humanitarian support to those affected by natural disasters.”

“Communication is vital in the aftermath of any disaster,” said Mr Kelver Darroux, Minister of Information, Science, Telecommunications and Technology of Dominica. “The emergency telecommunication equipment we have received from ITU brings us a step closer in our recovery process.”

“After a natural disaster, not a single life should be lost because of the break down in telecommunication services,” said Mr Brahima Sanou, Director of ITU’s Telecommunication Development Bureau. “The emergency communication equipment sent by ITU will provide vital links to coordinate relief and rescue efforts in Dominica.”

“The emergency telecommunication equipment we requested was delivered promptly, helping the government to extend its relief coordination efforts in areas affected by Tropical Storm Erika,” added Mr Lucien Blackmoore, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Information, Science, Telecommunications and Technology of Dominica.

The Government of Dominica has declared nine special disaster areas in the districts of Petite Savanne, Pichelin, Good Hope, Bath Estate (Paradise Valley), Dubique, Campbell, Coulibistrie, San Sauveur and Petite Soufrière.

ITU considers emergency telecommunications an integral part of the post-2015 development agenda.

For more information, please contact:

Sanjay Acharya

Chief, Media Relations and Public Information, ITU

telephone +41 22 730 5046

mobile +41 79 249 4861

email sanjay.acharya@itu.int

Monica Albertini

Communication Officer

Telecommunication Development Bureau

telephone +41 22 730 5317

mobile +41 79 808 6065

email monica.albertini@itu.int