The unprecedented step, described by government opponents as a “coup with two days’ notice”, left the Islamist organisation looking beaten and outnumbered just a year after it won elections in Egypt .

Fearing that President Mohammed Morsi was no longer capable of controlling the country, the army issued a statement on live television in response to the huge protest marches and violent clashes that have swept Cairo and other cities.

“The Armed Forces repeat their call to respond to the people’s demands, and give everyone 48 hours as a last chance to fulfil the burden of historical circumstance,” the statement, signed by Gen Abdulfatah al-Sisi, the minister of defence and head of the armed forces, said.

“If the demands of the people are not met within this period, it will be incumbent upon us to announce a road map for the future and oversee measures to implement it.”

The announcement appeared to stun the Brotherhood and supporters of President Morsi, who until the marches were launched on Sunday were confident that only a minority of people, mostly loyal to the former regime of ex-President Hosni Mubarak, supported opposition calls for him to quit.

There was no sign he had been informed in advance of the army’s move, even though Gen Sisi is a member of Mr Morsi’s cabinet and Mr Morsi is technically head of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces.

It is not clear that it means the army will force Mr Morsi to step down - or whether he would do so if it was demanded of him. He was said to be meeting Gen Sisi and to be preparing to give his own response on Monday night.

Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi wave national flags and light fireworks during a protest outside the presidential palace in Cairo (AP)

But many of the protesters on the streets believed the army would at least order fresh elections - a key demand. Tamarod, or “Rebellion”, the opposition coalition which organised Sunday’s protests and said it had gathered 22 million signatures calling for Mr Morsi to step down, said the army had “sided with the people”.

The announcement was met with cheers by tens of thousands gathered in Tahrir Square, many of them among whose presence in the same square led to the Mr Mubarak’s resignation in February 2011. In tumultuous scenes, drivers in Cairo honked their horns and waved national flags out of their windows. Several army helicopters flew over the square proudly trailing the national flag.

In a later statement, an army spokesman insisted there were no plans for a military coup.

The president himself remained silent, closeted last night with members of the Brotherhood's inner core. A press conference by his spokesman was cancelled, and a promised statement by the Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party was delayed.

But Mohammed el-Beltagy, the FJP's general secretary, told supporters at their Cairo rally it would not give in to calls for an early election, and would accept a coup "over our dead bodies".

Earlier, some protesters had turned their attention to the Brotherhood headquarters in the new development of Moqattam on the edge of Cairo.

Laser lights directed by Egyptian protestors on a military helicopter flying over the presidential palace in Cairo (AFP/Getty Images)

The police had refused to defend the property, and in the clashes that ensued gunshots were exchanged. Eight people, all protesters, were killed. Witnesses said that although there was firing from both sides, the Brotherhood supporters in the building were protected by sandbags.

As the attackers lay dying in the street, their colleagues hurled petrol bombs at the building, setting it alight. At around 7am, an armoured vehicle arrived to evacuate the occupants. The protesters then stormed the building, smashing windows, looting furniture and taking away cartloads of documents.

Angry relatives gathered at the morgue where bodies were taken and at the local police station, saying the police had arrested and then let go Brotherhood members in the area.

Alaa Mohammed el-Sayed, 26, said he himself had been shot in the hand and leg from inside the building as he tried to retrieve the body of his dead brother, Ahmed.

“He was shot in the head,” he said. “He died five minutes later. No ambulance came to rescue him.”

Tens of thousands of Egyptians demonstrate outside the presidential palace in Cairo (AFP/Getty Images)

A state security official standing guard said they had decided not to intervene so that they “did not have to arrest kids”.

The violence, and eight additional deaths elsewhere in the country, demonstrated the Brotherhood’s inability to command the authority of the police, a power base of the Mubarak regime. It not only refused to protect Brotherhood buildings, but several of its officers took part in the protests, even addressing the crowds in Tahrir Square.

Fireworks explode over hundreds of thousands of Egyptians gathering in Tahrir Square in Cairo (AP)

At their own semi-permanent counter-rally outside the Rabaa al-Adawiya mosque, Brotherhood supporters said they had been betrayed and urged Mr Morsi not to step aside.

“This is a counter-revolution against legitimacy,” Sayed Wanas, a teacher said. The Brotherhood point to Mr Morsi’s election victory a year ago and say he is the only democratically chosen leader in Egypt’s 7,000-year history.

“If the army doesn’t protect legitimate government, the people will protect it themselves.”