Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption The BBC's Aleem Maqbool in Tahrir Square says the size of the protest has been wholly unexpected

Huge protests across Egypt calling for the resignation of President Mohammed Morsi have taken place through the night, with some outbreaks of violence.

In the capital, Cairo, tens of thousands of people massed in Tahrir Square and outside the presidential palace in the biggest demonstration there since the 2011 revolution.

At least one person was killed in clashes at Cairo's headquarters of Mr Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood movement.

Four others died in clashes elsewhere.

Millions of protesters across the country accuse the country's first Islamist president of failing to tackle economic and security problems since taking power a year ago.

The most striking aspect of the protests in Alexandria is the variety of people here - veiled and non-veiled Mahmoud Abu Bakr, Alexandria Angry mood in provincial Egypt

The demonstration was largely peaceful, but some protesters later threw stones and petrol bombs at the Cairo headquarters of the Muslim Brotherhood.

At least one person was killed when shooting broke out near the political office, activists and a hospital official said.

Meanwhile, thousands of Mr Morsi supporters staged a rally in the Cairo suburb of Nasr City.

A presidential spokesman later urged the protesters to respect the democratic process, referring to Mr Morsi's victory in last year's elections which were widely seen as free and fair.

Analysis Many of those on the streets feel betrayed by a president who they say has been uninterested in uniting Egyptians despite once promising to be inclusive. They feel that he has instead governed purely in the interests of his own party. For his part, the president insists he has invited opposition groups to enter into dialogue but that they have not co-operated. His supporters say that whatever the considerable problems Egypt is facing, Mohammed Morsi must see out his full term in office for the sake of stability. Some pro-Morsi demonstrators have decided to stage their own sit-ins, and there are fears of clashes between opposing groups. The coming hours, and the way the situation is handled by the authorities, are likely to give us clear indications about whether or not Egypt's president can survive in office as he insists he will.

One clear achievement of President Morsi's opponents has been to get so many people out on to the streets, BBC's Middle East editor Jeremy Bowen reports from Cairo.

The last time such numbers were seen on the square was during the revolution in 2011 which saw the removal of President Hosni Mubarak from power.

The question they face now is how to fashion a political strategy that can rival the organisation of the Muslim Brotherhood, he says.

Another big question, he adds, is what the army will do. The defence minister has warned that the military may intervene if Egypt becomes ungovernable.

Society split

On Sunday, one man was killed and at least 24 injured in Beni Suef, 115km (71 miles) south of Cairo, security sources said.

According to a report on the Ahram news website, Morsi supporters attacked an opposition rally and unidentified gunmen opened fire. The report could not be confirmed independently.

Image copyright AFP Image caption A huge crowd of protesters stretched along an avenue near the presidential palace in Cairo on Sunday evening Image copyright Reuters Image caption Tahrir Square, focus of the uprising which ousted Hosni Mubarak, teemed with protesters Image copyright AP Image caption A protester in Cairo held a crossed-out photo of President Morsi framed with a tyre Image copyright AP Image caption In one picture police officers are seen in the middle of opposition supporters in Cairo Image copyright Reuters Image caption A big rally against Mr Morsi took place in Alexandria too Image copyright Reuters Image caption Alexandria was the scene of bloody fighting earlier this week previous slide next slide

In the southern city of Assiut, three people died and several were injured when shots were fired at protesters, reportedly by attackers on a motorcycle.

According to the health ministry, 253 people were injured across the country during Sunday's protests.

Mohammed Morsi's first year Image copyright AP June 2012 - Narrowly wins presidential election. Orders parliament to meet in defiance of a military decree dissolving it

Narrowly wins presidential election. Orders parliament to meet in defiance of a military decree dissolving it July 2012 - Submits to a Supreme Court ruling that the parliamentary elections were invalid

Submits to a Supreme Court ruling that the parliamentary elections were invalid August 2012 - Dismisses Defence Minister Hussein Tantawi and Chief of Staff Sami Annan, and strips military of say in legislation and drafting the new constitution

Dismisses Defence Minister Hussein Tantawi and Chief of Staff Sami Annan, and strips military of say in legislation and drafting the new constitution November 2012 - Rescinds a decree stripping the judiciary of the right to challenge his decisions, after popular protests

- Rescinds a decree stripping the judiciary of the right to challenge his decisions, after popular protests December 2012 - Public vote approves draft constitution boosting the role of Islam and restricting freedom of speech and assembly

Public vote approves draft constitution boosting the role of Islam and restricting freedom of speech and assembly March 2013 - Court halts his plans to bring parliamentary elections forward to April, citing failure to refer the electoral law to the Constitutional Court

Court halts his plans to bring parliamentary elections forward to April, citing failure to refer the electoral law to the Constitutional Court June 2013 - Puts Islamists in charge of 13 of Egypt's 27 governorships - controversially he appoints a member of the former armed group Gamaa Islamiya to be governor of Luxor Polarisation marks Morsi's first year Egyptian views of Morsi one year on Families torn by political divide

In Cairo, unidentified persons attacked the Muslim Brotherhood headquarters, which had been fortified with sandbags earlier. Staff inside said they had not broken in, Reuters news agency reports.

Demonstrations were also held in Alexandria, Port Said, Suez and other cities.

Presidential spokesman Ihab Fahmi called on all Egyptians to "unite and listen to the sound of wisdom".

"Political diversity necessitates on all parties to abide by the democratic process," he said.

And he reiterated that President Morsi was open to a "real and serious national dialogue".

As darkness fell, the opposition National Salvation Front (NSF) released what it called "Revolution Statement 1", calling on protesters across Egypt to "maintain their peaceful [rallies] in all the squares and streets and villages and hamlets of the country... until the last of this dictatorial regime falls".

The NSF is among liberal and secular opposition groups which have endorsed a petition organised by the grassroots movement Tamarod (Rebellion), which calls for a snap election. Opposition activists say more than 22 million people have signed it.

There was also some evidence of anti-American and anti-Israeli feeling among the protesters, with one flag portraying President Morsi inside a Star of David.

The BBC's Aleem Maqbool in Cairo says many ordinary Egyptians - angered by Mr Morsi's political and economic policies - have been taking part in the rally in Tahrir Square.

At one point, army helicopters flew over Tahrir Square and dropped Egyptian flags, to cheers from the anti-Morsi crowd, he says.

Mr Morsi, who hails from the Muslim Brotherhood, became president on 30 June 2012.

His first year as president has been marred by constant political unrest and a sinking economy.