CAIRO—Millions of Egyptians flooded into the streets on the first anniversary of Islamist President Mohammed Morsi’s inauguration on Sunday to demand that he resign in the biggest challenge so far to rule by his Muslim Brotherhood. Waving national flags and chanting “Get out!”, a crowd of nearly 500,000 massed on Cairo’s central Tahrir Square. It was the largest demonstration since the 2011 uprising that overthrew Morsi’s predecessor, Hosni Mubarak. “The people want the fall of the regime!” they shouted, echoing the Arab Spring rallying cry that brought down Mubarak — this time yelling it not against an aging dictator but against the first elected leader in Egypt’s 5,000-year recorded history. While the main protests were peaceful, four people were shot dead in the Nile Valley towns of Assiut and Beni Suef, south of Cairo, and the Health Ministry said nearly 200 were injured in clashes in several provincial towns. A military source said as many as 14 million people in this nation of 84 million took part in Sunday’s demonstrations in temperatures of 38 C. There was no independent way of verifying that estimate, which seemed implausibly high, but the armed forces used helicopters to monitor the crowds.

Article Continued Below

The Brotherhood’s national headquarters in a Cairo suburb came under attack from militants hurling petrol bombs and rocks and firing shotguns. Flames gushed from an upper floor of the building, which did not have police protection. The liberal opposition National Salvation Front coalition declared victory in what it styled “Revolutionary Communiqué No. 1,” saying the masses had “confirmed the downfall of the regime of Mohammed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood.” Organizers called on demonstrators to continue to occupy central squares in every city until Morsi quits and to blockade peacefully the only functioning house of parliament. The Tahrir crowd roared with approval as an army helicopter hovering overhead dropped Egyptian flags on the protesters.

The military source said the move was intended to encourage patriotism and was not a gesture of political support. Many demonstrators bellowed their anger at the Brotherhood, which they accuse of hijacking Egypt’s revolution and using electoral victories to monopolize power and impose Islamic law. Others, including some who said they had voted for Morsi, have been alienated by a deepening economic crisis and worsening personal security, aggravated by a political deadlock over which he has presided. Even some Islamists have disavowed Morsi. The veteran leaders of Egypt’s secular, liberal and left-wing opposition, including former chief of the United Nations nuclear watchdog Mohamed ElBaradei and leftist presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahi, joined protest marches in Cairo.

Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi protest outside the presidential palace, in Cairo, Egypt, Sunday, June 30. ( Khalil Hamra / AP ) Thousands of opponents and supporters of Egypt's Islamist president began massing in city squares in competing rallies Sunday, gearing up for a day of massive nationwide protests. ( Heba Khamis / AP ) Mass demonstrations across Egypt on Sunday may determine its future, two and half years after people power toppled a dictator they called Pharaoh and ushered in a democracy crippled by bitter divisions. ( MOHAMED ABD EL GHANY / REUTERS ) Protesters opposing Egyptian President Mohamed Mursi shout slogans against him and Brotherhood members during a protest at Tahrir Square in Cairo June 30. ( MOHAMED ABD EL GHANY / REUTERS ) Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohamed Morsi shout slogans during a protest calling for his ouster in the northern coastal city of Alexandria on June 30, 2013. Thousands of Morsi's opponents protested in different cities across Egypt on the first anniversary of his inauguration, determined to oust him as his Islamist supporters vowed to defend his legitimacy to the end. ( AHMED ARAB / AFP/GETTY IMAGES )

A Reuters journalist said hundreds of thousands of anti-government protesters also marched through the Mediterranean port of Alexandria, Egypt’s second city, and a military source reported protests in at least 20 towns around the country. Morsi, an engineering professor propelled from obscurity to power by the Brotherhood, was monitoring events from the heavily guarded Qubba presidential palace, where a presidency spokesman appealed for the demonstrations to remain peaceful. A senior Brotherhood politician, Essam El-Erian, denounced the protests as a “coup attempt.” In a statement on the group’s website, he challenged the opposition to test public opinion in parliamentary elections instead of “simply massing people in violent demonstrations, thuggery or shedding the precious blood of Egyptians.” The leader of the second biggest Islamist party, Younis Makhyoun of the Salafist Nour party, urged Morsi to make concessions to avert bloodshed and presented himself in an interview with Reuters as a potential mediator.

Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi protest outside the presidential palace, in Cairo, Egypt, Sunday, June 30. ( Khalil Hamra / AP ) Thousands of opponents and supporters of Egypt's Islamist president began massing in city squares in competing rallies Sunday, gearing up for a day of massive nationwide protests. ( Heba Khamis / AP ) Mass demonstrations across Egypt on Sunday may determine its future, two and half years after people power toppled a dictator they called Pharaoh and ushered in a democracy crippled by bitter divisions. ( MOHAMED ABD EL GHANY / REUTERS ) Protesters opposing Egyptian President Mohamed Mursi shout slogans against him and Brotherhood members during a protest at Tahrir Square in Cairo June 30. ( MOHAMED ABD EL GHANY / REUTERS ) Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohamed Morsi shout slogans during a protest calling for his ouster in the northern coastal city of Alexandria on June 30, 2013. Thousands of Morsi's opponents protested in different cities across Egypt on the first anniversary of his inauguration, determined to oust him as his Islamist supporters vowed to defend his legitimacy to the end. ( AHMED ARAB / AFP/GETTY IMAGES )

Security sources said three Brotherhood offices were set on fire by demonstrators in towns in the Nile Delta, the latest in more than a week of sporadic violence in which hundreds of people have been hurt and several killed, including an American student. Tens of thousands of Morsi supporters congregated outside a Cairo mosque not far from the main presidential palace, where a much bigger anti-Morsi sit-in swelled from Sunday evening. Interviewed by a British newspaper, Morsi voiced his resolve to ride out what he sees as an undemocratic attack on his electoral legitimacy. He offered to revise the Islamist-inspired constitution, saying clauses on religious authority, which fuelled liberal resentment, were not his choice. He made a similar offer last week, after the head of the army issued a strong call for politicians to compromise. But the opposition dismissed it as too little to late. They hope Morsi will resign in the face of large numbers on the streets. Some Egyptians believe the army may force the president’s hand, if not to quit then at least to make substantial concessions to the opposition. Morsi and the Brotherhood hope the protests will fizzle as previous outbursts did in December and January. If not, some form of compromise, possibly arbitrated by the army, may be on the cards. Both sides insist they plan no violence but accuse the other — and agents provocateurs from the old regime — of planning it.

Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi protest outside the presidential palace, in Cairo, Egypt, Sunday, June 30. ( Khalil Hamra / AP ) Thousands of opponents and supporters of Egypt's Islamist president began massing in city squares in competing rallies Sunday, gearing up for a day of massive nationwide protests. ( Heba Khamis / AP ) Mass demonstrations across Egypt on Sunday may determine its future, two and half years after people power toppled a dictator they called Pharaoh and ushered in a democracy crippled by bitter divisions. ( MOHAMED ABD EL GHANY / REUTERS ) Protesters opposing Egyptian President Mohamed Mursi shout slogans against him and Brotherhood members during a protest at Tahrir Square in Cairo June 30. ( MOHAMED ABD EL GHANY / REUTERS ) Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohamed Morsi shout slogans during a protest calling for his ouster in the northern coastal city of Alexandria on June 30, 2013. Thousands of Morsi's opponents protested in different cities across Egypt on the first anniversary of his inauguration, determined to oust him as his Islamist supporters vowed to defend his legitimacy to the end. ( AHMED ARAB / AFP/GETTY IMAGES )

U.S. President Barack Obama called for dialogue and warned trouble in the most populous Arab nation could unsettle an already turbulent region. Washington has evacuated non-essential personnel and reinforced security at diplomatic missions.

Read more about: