Members of Egypt's revamped Constituent Assembly – responsible for drafting a new constitution – are as follows:

1. Abul-Ela Madi, leader of moderate-Islamist Wasat Party

2. Ahmed Ibrahim El-Halwani, head of the Teachers Syndicate and a member of the Freedom and Justice Party

3. Ahmed Diab, secretary-general of Muslim Brotherhood's parliamentary bloc

4. Ahmed Omar, head of the Students Union at Zagazig University in Sharqeya governorate

5. Ahmed Maher Ibrahim Tantawi, April 6 Youth Movement founder

6. Ahmed Mohamed Khalifa, cassation lawyer

7. Edward Ghalab, judge

8. Osama Mohamed El-Abd, head of Al-Azhar University

9. Osama Yassin, MP for Freedom and Justice Party, head of parliamentary youth committee

10. Ashraf Thabet Saad El-Din, MP for Salafist Nour Party, deputy president of People’s Assembly

11. Ahsraf Abdel-Ghafour: Actor, head of Egyptian Actors Syndicate

12. Ekrami Saad, a revolutionary

13. Amani Abul-Fadl, a member of the International Islamic Committee for Woman and Child

14. Omaima Kamel, MP for the Freedom and Justice Party

15. Bishop John Paul Fatla, vice chairman of the International Council of Churches for Catholics

16. Bishop Paul, Coptic Orthodox Church representative

17. Ayman Ali, vice President of the Federation of Islamic Organizations in Europe

18. Ayman Nour, former presidential candidate, leader of Ghad El-Thawra Party

19. Bassam El-Sayid Hassenein Metawly, MP for Salafist El-Nour Party

20. Bahaa El-Din Abul-Shoka, prominent lawyer, leading Wafd Party member

21. Taymour Fawzy Mostafa, Chairman of the Administrative Prosecution Authority

22. Gaber Gad Nasar, professor of constitutional law at Cairo University

23. Gamal Gebriel, professor of law at Helwan University

24. Hossam El-Gherainy, head of Supreme Judicial Council, known for closeness to Brotherhood

25. Hassan Mahmoud Abdel-Latif, head of the Arabic Language Academy

26. Hussein Ibrahim, MP for the Freedom and Justice Party

27. Hussein Hamed Hassan, a member of the International Union for Muslim Scholars

28. Khaled Mahmoud El-Azhary, MP for the Freedom and Justice Party

29. Dawood El-Baz, professor of law at Damanhour University

30. Sameh Ashour, head of Egyptian Lawyers Syndicate

31. Soad Kamel Rizk, Dean of Faculty of Management and Information Systems, French University

32. Said Abdel Azim, a member of the Islamic Legitimate Body of Rights and Reformation and a Salafist figure in Alexandria

33. Samir Marcus, liberal Christian thinker and writer

34. Shaaban Abdel-Hamid Darwish, an Islamic scholar

35. Shaaban Ahmed Abdel-Alim, head of the parliamentary education committee

36. Shahira Halim Dos, a political activist and member of El-Wafd party

37. Sobhi Saleh, MP and leading Freedom and Justice Party member

38. Salah Abdel-Maboud Fiyad, MP for Nour Party

39. Taher Abdel-Mohsen, a Shura Council member and a member of the Freedom and Justice party

40. Talaat Marzouk Abdel-Aziz, head of the parliamentary suggestions and complaints committee

41. Adel Abdel-Hamid Abdullah, justice minister

42. Atef El-Banna, Cairo University constitutional law professor

43. Abdel El-Galil Mostafa, general coordinator for National Association for Change

44. Abdel-Diyam Mohamed Nossair, an adviser for Al-Azhar Grand Imam Ahmed El-Tayeb

45. Abdel-Rahman El-Bar, Islamic scholar, Al-Azhar professor and a member of the Muslim Brotherhood

46. Abdel-Rahman Mohamed Shukry, head of the Farmers’ Syndicate and a member of the Freedom and Justice Party

47. Abd El-Send Yamama, professor of international law at Monofeya University

48. Abdel-Fattah Khattab, head of the Coalition for Tourism Workers

49. Abdullah Said Abul-Ezz, a judge

50. Essam El-Erian, MP, head of parliament's foreign affairs committee and leading Freedom and Justice Party member

51. Essam Abdel-Rahman Sultan, lawyer and MP for Wasat Party

52. Atiya Fiyad, Islamic jurisprudence Professor at the Azhar University

53. Ali Fath El-Bab, a member of the Shura Council for the FJP and head of the council's majority

54. Emad Hussein Hassan, deputy interior minister and former head of the Police Academy

55. Emad El-Din Abdel-Ghafour, Chairman of the Salafist Nour Party

56. Amr Daraag, a leading Freedom and Justice Party member

57. Amr Moussa, former presidential candidate, ex-minister of foreign affairs and former Arab League secretary-general

58. Fouad Badrawy, vice president of the Wafd Party

59. Farouk Gowida, a poet and writer

60. Farid Ismail, MP for the Freedom and Justice Party

61. Safwat Naguib, a priest

62. Maged Mamdouh Kamel Shabita, State Council member

63. Maher Ali Ahmed El-Bahairy, first deputy of the constitutional court head

64. Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, MP for the Wafd Party

65. Mohamed Ahmed Sherif, President of the Menya University

66. Mohamed Ahmed Abdel-Kader, farmers' representatives for the Wafd Party

67. Mohamed Ahmed Atta Omara, MP for the Nour Party

68. Mohamed El-Beltagi: MP, Parliament speaker and leading Freedom and Justice Party figure

69. Mohamed Anwar El-Sadat: MP, head of parliament's human rights committee and leader of the liberal Reform and Building Party

70. Mohamed Ibrahim Hassan, prominent Salafist preacher

71. Mohamed Khairy Abdel-Diyam, former head of the Doctors' Syndicate

72. Mohamed Saad Gawish, a young member of the Salafist Call

73. Mohamed Selim El-Awa, former presidential candidate, Islamist thinker, lawyer, and Wasat Party co-founder

74. Mohamed Abdel-Gawad, head of the Pharmacists' Syndicate

75. Mohamed Abdel-Alim Daud, MP for the Wafd Party

76. Mohamed Abdel-Moneim El-Sawy, independent MP, head of parliament's culture, media and tourism committee and Hadara Party founder

77. Mohamed Ali Bashr, professor at the engineering faculty of the Monofyia University

78. Mohamed Amara, prominent Islamic thinker

79. Mohamed Fouad Gadallah, Vice president of the State Council

80. Mohamed Maged Kholousy, head of Egyptian Engineers' Syndicate

81. Mohamed Magdy El-Din Barkat, head of the military prosecution

82. Mohamed Mahsoub Abdel-Maguid, leading Wasat Party member and law professor at the Menoufiya University

83. Mohamed Mahmoud Abdel-Salem Abdel-Latif, a lawyer from Al-Azhar youth

84. Mohamed Mohi El-Din Mohamed, an engineering university professor

85. Mohamed Nagi Darballa, a Vice president of the Cassation court

86. Mohamed Yousry Ibrahim, a salafist preacher and former Nour Party spokesman

87. Mahmoud Ghozlan, official Muslim Brotherhood spokesman

88. Moatez Belallah Abdel-Fattah, a political science professor and former prime ministerial adviser

89. Mamdouh El-Wali, head of the Journalists' Syndicate

90. Mamdouh Shahin, a Lieutenant-General, defence minister's aide for legal affairs and a SCAF member

91. Manar El-Shorobagy, a political science professor

92. Manal El-Tiby, head of the Egyptian Centre for Housing Rights (ECHR)

93. Mouncif Naguib Soliman, a judge and member of the Church's general congregation council

94. Nader Bakkar, a Nour Party spokesman

95. Nasr Farid Wassel, An Al-Azhar Sheikh and former grand Mufti of Egypt

96. Huda Ghonia, an MP for the Freedom and Justice Party

97. Wahid Abdel-Maguid, a political science professor

98. Walid Abdel-Awal, an MP for the Nour Party

99. Yasser El-Borhami, a Salafist Sheikh and Nour Party co-founder

100. Younis Makhioun, an MP for the Nour Party

Short link:

