Yesterday morning 30th June the world waited to see how Egypt would express itself. Nationwide protests had been called to express the dis-satisfaction of the people with the elected President and call for his resignation. I waited with bated breath also. Would the Egyptians turn out in enough numbers to convince the unbelieving world there is a real problem here? More importantly for me – would Luxor turn out? Though there were a few demonstrations during the 2011 revolution against Mubarak, for the most part Luxor and the surrounding areas were not overly concerned and did not turn out in large numbers. Would 30th June 2013 be the same?

At 4pm I headed off with my young driver, Ahmed. As we headed towards the centre of town I was shocked at the empty streets. It was March 2011 when I last saw empty streets in the afternoon. Where was everyone? Were they sleeping? After all it was 43 degrees celsius and stiflingly hot. Was the weather keeping everyone at home? I was so surprised I asked Ahmed to turn around and drive back over the route again so I could record the following boring video.

The tent-like structures on the right-hand side is the open air food market ALWAYS busy with people day and night – now completely deserted save for a few people looking after their own stalls and their neighbours’.

Above: Our drive around the deserted Luxor Streets 30 June 2013 – just before the second revolution hit the streets!

Ahmed kept reassuring me that everyone was going to turn out any minute now. He wasn’t wrong. No sooner did we get to the Council Offices on the Cornishe (street on the Nile) people started to arrive beating drums, chanting and waving the Egyptian flag.

Suddenly, a shout went up and everyone dashed to the riverside. The flag-waving got more furious; laughter filled the air; fingers pointed excitedly across the river; children and teenagers jumped up and down with excitement and delighted. From across the Nile a flotilla of boats and motor launches began to move over the water, packed with people also waving flags – the sounds of their chanting and beating drums flew across the Nile like angel song! There is always rivalry between the East and West Bank of Luxor, but today the men from the West and East were greeting each other like true brothers with hugs and kisses. The air was electric. I got goosebumps just watching them, tears coming to my eyes. I’m not joking, in that moment and for the rest of the day I felt more patriotically Egyptian than Irish!

Above: Flotilla crossing the Nile bringing the men from West Bank.

Ahmed suggested we go to check out Luxor Temple as he said that was going to be another gathering point. He was right again. The following are videos I took there as marches came from Karnak, Sawagi, Awamea and other outlying areas.

Above: Streets in front of Luxor Temple are full!

Above: The people from Sawag, Awamea, TV street etc. arriving at Luxor Temple

Above: 2nd wave of protesters arrive Luxor Temple from Karnak

Above: Protesters arriving at Luxor Council Offices

Ahmed saw me looking for vantage point to take photos, spotted a Calesh driver he knew and up we went. Perched high on the Calesh, steadying myself with a hand on the driver’s shoulder (not proper in ordinary life!), I felt a hand tugging at my ankle. Looking down, there was a foreign lady wanting to speak with me. She was concerned that I might be hurt – wanted to know if I knew an American had been killed while filming a battle outside a Muslim Brotherhood office in Alexandria the day before. I assured her I was in no danger. Luxor is not Cairo and most people know each other by sight and far from wanting to do me or any tourist harm they go to extra lengths in times like this to ensure our safety. The lovely lady went away shaking her head, it was nice of her to be concerned for me.

My phone is not good and my apps don’t work properly so I had to go home for an hour or so to upload the videos – and change my soaking clothes; it was really hot out there! As Ahmed and myself headed back to the Corniche, which was the main gathering place; we thought there was something wrong, there were hundreds of people, cars and minibuses crowding the street. We arrived at the Savoy Shopping Centre and parked the car. Going through the Savoy Centre from the Avenue of the Sphinxes is a short cut to the Cornishe. It was very difficult to make out way through the throng of people coming against us, though we were in a stream of people also heading for the Corniche. Ahmed asked if something had happened? “No, we’re just going for food and clothes!” one man told him. Everyone’s clothes were wet with perspiration.

On the Corniche, as we exited the Savoy there was a line of men holding hands; making a corridor into the front, sealed off area of the Governor’s Offices. It was packed with women of all ages! I was surprised and when I asked why, did they think women were in danger? One of the men pointed to the street, packed with men, shook his head, shrugged his shoulders and said “How? Impossible!” He was right. The crowd was just too big and too packed together to even walk through in some places. I went inside, since I was a foreigner they sent Ahmed inside with me also 🙂 I was immediately greeted with cries of “Welcome!, Welcome! The atmosphere was infectious and the women’s chanting seemed to never stop. I wished my arabic was better!

I think Luxor has never seen a day of such unity and solidarity across religions, sexes and nationalities. Numbers who turned out were impossible for me to calculate – perhaps 10,000. One thing is sure: Luxor is alive, well and ready to fight back! I can’t wait to see and participate on what these marvellous, strong and proud people are going to do next!