Saturday’s rally underscored the region’s deepening sectarian rift. A cleric who spoke before Morsi described Shiites as heretics, infidels, oppressors and polytheists. (Iran, which is predominantly Shiite, backs Hezbollah.)

“Hezbollah must leave Syria. These are serious words,” said Morsi, whose country hosted a conference this week of Sunni clerics who issued a call for holy war against Damascus. “There is no space or place for Hezbollah in Syria.”

Addressing a rally called by Sunni Muslim clerics in Cairo, the Islamist head of state also warned Assad’s ally, the Lebanese Shiite militia Hezbollah, to pull back from fighting in Syria .

CAIRO—Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi said Saturday that he has cut all diplomatic ties with Damascus and is backing a no-fly zone over war-torn Syria , pitching the most populous Arab state more firmly against President Bashar Assad.

Morsi, a Muslim Brotherhood politician, steered clear of direct references to Shiites and Iran but, in a partial allusion to Tehran, he accused states in the region and beyond of feeding “a campaign of extermination and planned ethnic cleansing” in Syria.

Morsi waved Syrian and Egyptian flags as he entered the auditorium packed with 20,000 supporters. The crowd chanted: “From the free revolutionaries of Egypt: we will stamp on you, Bashar!”

The rally was also a show of support for Morsi as his opponents mobilize for protests to demand early presidential elections.

“We decided today to entirely break off relations with Syria and with the current Syrian regime,” he said. He also urged world powers not to hesitate to enforce a no-fly zone over Syria.

Western diplomats said on Friday that Washington was considering a limited no-fly zone over parts of Syria, but the White House said later that the United States had no national interest in pursuing that option.

On Saturday, however, Washington said it will keep Patriot missiles and F-16 jet fighters in Jordan after joint military exercises end next week.

The decision to put Patriot batteries — an air and missile defence system — in Jordan has been particularly distasteful for Russia, which as Assad’s main global ally and a fierce opponent of outside military intervention in Syria, said any attempt to impose a no-fly zone using batteries based in Jordan would be illegal.

Morsi said he was organizing an urgent summit of Arab and other Islamic states to discuss the situation in Syria, where the United States has in recent days decided to take steps to arm the rebels.

Egypt’s U.S.-funded and -trained army is among the most powerful in the Middle East. There has been no suggestion, however, that Egypt, a country steeped in poverty, should get involved in the fighting in Syria.

The Brotherhood joined calls this week from Sunni religious organizations for jihad against Assad and his Shiite allies.

Egypt has not taken an active role in arming the Syrian rebels, but an aide to Morsi said this week that Cairo would not stand in the way of Egyptians who wanted to fight in Syria.

It marked Morsi’s second combative foreign policy speech in less than a week. On Monday, he said Egypt would keep “all options open” for dealing with a dispute with Ethiopia over a giant dam it is building on the Nile, though he said Cairo did not want war and stressed it would work diplomatically.

Morsi’s liberal and leftist opponents are mobilizing for mass protests on June 30, the anniversary of Morsi coming to office, fuelling fears of possible further violence.

Morsi told his Islamist supporters at the rally that they must not be dragged into confrontations and that he would not tolerate any violence.