Order security forces to end unlawful, excessive use of force and to act in accordance with international human rights law and standards on the use of force in policing demonstrations.

For the Rab’a dispersal, Human Rights Watch arrived at its own casualty figure, which exceeds the FMA tally, by cross-checking the official register with figures compiled by the quasi-official National Council for Human Rights (NCHR) and documentation conducted by Human Rights Watch researchers and Egyptian human rights lawyers. Human Rights Watch further reviewed lists of additional dead compiled by survivors and other civil society organizations.

In establishing the number of casualties for each incident of mass killings of protesters outside of the Rab’a dispersal, Human Rights Watch relied on official figures, generally from the Forensic Medical Authority (FMA), a part of Egypt’s Health Ministry. Because the FMA only includes in its count bodies which it has received and processed at official morgues, it may undercount the actual number of fatalities. These figures, therefore, should be considered lower-bound estimates.

Human Rights Watch wrote to the Interior Ministry, Office of the Public Prosecutor, Defense Ministry, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Embassy in Washington, D.C., and Mission in New York on June 12, 2014 soliciting the Egyptian government’s perspectives on the issues covered in this report. Human Rights Watch sent follow-up letters on July 8, 2014. The letters laid out preliminary findings and requested answers to specific questions and information not available to Human Rights Watch, including details on officers killed by armed demonstrators and instructions given to security forces regarding the use of live ammunition. The letters were sent by post, e-mail, and fax and receipt was confirmed. While Foreign Ministry officials responded by indicating that they are in touch with other ministries regarding Human Rights Watch’s request, as of August 1, 2014, Human Rights had not received responses to its questions. Copies of the letters are included in the appendix of this report.

Human Rights Watch also met with several members of the June 30 fact-finding commission and Nasser Amin, lead author of the report on the Rab’a dispersal prepared by the National Council for Human Rights (NCHR).

All interviews were conducted with the full consent of those being interviewed and all of the interviewees were told how Human Rights Watch would use the information provided. The vast majority of interviews were conducted in Arabic at different locations in and around Cairo. Human Rights Watch is withholding names of many witnesses for their security.

Human Rights Watch interviewed 22 witnesses to the August 16 violence in Ramses Square, including 12 journalists, 6 doctors, 2 protesters, and a senior police officer and a sniper at the Azbakiya police station who were present during the clashes.

In investigating the August 14 al-Nahda dispersal, Human Rights Watch interviewed ten witnesses present during the dispersal of the sit-in, and spoke to four administrators of hospitals who received casualties that day. Human Rights Watch also interviewed five demonstrators and two doctors who treated wounded from a nearby August 14 protest in Mustafa Mahmoud Square.

In documenting the dispersal of the Rab’a sit-in on August 14, Human Rights Watch staff interviewed 122 witnesses, including 69 protesters, 20 journalists, 20 medics, 3 lawyers, and 10 local residents, including some fleeing the dispersal on August 14 and in hospitals and morgues in the surrounding area in subsequent days.

For the July 27 killing of protesters outside the Manassa Memorial, Human Rights Watch interviewed 11 witnesses to the violence, including at field hospitals as the attacks were taking place.

With regards to the July 8 mass killings at the Republican Guard headquarters, Human Rights Watch spoke to 24 witnesses, including protesters and neighborhood residents, and interviewed seven doctors. Human Rights Watch also visited the site of the incident, four hospitals where the dead and injured were taken, and Cairo’s main morgue.

For the investigation of the shootings at the Republican Guard headquarters on July 5, Human Rights Watch visited Taa’min al-Saahi, the government hospital where many injured and dead protesters were taken, and interviewed seven witnesses, including demonstrators, as well as an independent journalist on the scene, a local resident, and relatives of the deceased protesters.

Human Rights Watch researchers visited hospitals on the same day as the July 5 shootings at the Republican Guard headquarters and visited the Rab’a field hospital at the time of the July 27 Manassa Memorial mass killing and in the final hours of the August 14 Rab’a dispersal. A Human Rights Watch researcher was also on site for much of the Rab’a dispersal itself.

The shrinking space for free association, expression, and assembly, increasing restrictions on the work of human rights organizations, including arrests of rights defenders, and highly polarized political context in Egypt imposed significant obstacles on the researchers and authors of this report, including difficulty accessing protest sites, morgues, and hospitals and constant security threats in conducting victim interviews.

In some cases, Human Rights Watch was able to examine television and video footage of specific incidents documented in this report, which it has preserved on file. Before inclusion in this report, Human Rights Watch determined that all video footage it referenced was authentic. It did so through a variety of means, including carefully studying contextual clues, reviewing footage alongside independent witnesses, and, in some cases, interviewing the videographer him/herself.

This report is based on research carried out largely in Cairo from July 2013 to July 2014. Human Rights Watch interviewed over 200 victims and their family members, witnesses, doctors, journalists, and lawyers. Researchers largely conducted interviews in two periods: one in the days immediately following the events in July-August 2013 and a second one six months later in January-February 2014. The report also makes use of official statements from government officials.

This report focuses on several of the most significant incidents of state violence against demonstrators in July-August 2013. The events documented in this report are not an exhaustive list of all killings that took place during this period; the report, in particular, does not investigate bloody acts of violence that took place between pro-Morsy and pro-government supporters throughout this period. It also does not explore in depth other rights violations, including mass arrests of Morsy supporters.

On December 19, 2013, just after midnight, security forces raided the Cairo office of the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights, a prominent rights group, and detained two staff members and four volunteers, subjecting them to ill-treatment before releasing five of the group the next morning. The sixth, the above-mentioned Mohamed Adel, was sentenced to three years in prison for allegedly violating the assembly law. On May 22, 2014, police raided the same group’s Alexandria office, briefly arresting at least 15 activists and lawyers and subjecting them to ill-treatment.

On April 28, 2014, the Court of Urgent Matters banned the activities of the April 6 Youth Movement, which led many of the mass protests during the 2011 uprising, and ordered the authorities to shut down its headquarters. The court ruled that the group was “co-operating with foreign states, including the US, to cut US aid, possessing weapons, protesting and spreading chaos in the country,” and had “distorted Egypt’s image.”

On December 25, 2013 the government designated the Muslim Brotherhood a terrorist organization. Since July 3, 2013, authorities have also frozen the assets of senior leaders and taken control of over 1,000 NGOs linked to the Brotherhood and dozens of Brotherhood-affiliated schools. The government has yet to put forward an evidentiary basis for this designation and the related sanctions.

In January, the government put a travel ban on academic and former Member of Parliament Amr Hamzawy. Prosecutors charged Hamzawy with “insulting the judiciary” based on a tweet that deemed a particular court case to be politicized. The same month authorities charged another prominent academic, Emad Shahin, with conspiring with foreign organizations to harm national security. Both Hamzawy and Shahin had been critical of some of President Morsy’s policies, but also criticized the heavy repression that followed his ouster.

The government issued a new law in November that severely restricts peaceful demonstrations and has continued to use penal code provisions that criminalize speech offenses to imprison journalists and activists. The authorities have imprisoned prominent activists like the co-founder of the April 6 Youth Movement Ahmed Maher, April 6 leader Mohamed Adel, human rights defenders Mahienoor al-Masry and Yara Sallam, and bloggers Ahmed Douma and Alaa Abdel Fattah under the new protest law, along with scores of other activists and government critics. Maher, Douma, and Adel received three-year prison sentences in December 2013. Al-Masry was given a two-year sentence in May 2014. Abdel Fattah was sentenced to 15-years in prison in June 2014. Sallam was detained and facing trial at the time of writing. Authorities also arrested some of the few activists who openly challenged the draft constitution proposed by the military-backed government or called for a “no” vote in the January 2014 constitutional referendum.

Following the ouster of former president Hosni Mubarak, there was scope for government critics to express their views publicly in privately-owned media. During President Morsy’s year in office, however, prosecutions resumed of journalists and political activists on charges of “insulting” the president or other officials and institutions and “spreading false information,” using Mubarak-era penal code provisions. After July 2013, the military-backed government closed down all TV stations affiliated with or sympathetic to the Muslim Brotherhood, as well as other Islamist stations. Egypt has particularly targeted Doha-based Al Jazeera, closing its Egypt offices, and arresting many of its reporters. Three Al Jazeera English journalists, Mohamed Fahmy, Peter Greste, and Baher Mohamed, received multi-year prison sentences after a trial in which prosecutors failed to present any credible evidence of criminal wrongdoing.

Many of the trials reviewed by Human Rights Watch have been grossly unfair and riddled with serious due process violations, violating both Egyptian law and international standards. These trials, including mass trials involving hundreds of people in a single case, failed to assess the individual guilt of each defendant, yet resulted in lengthy sentences or even the death penalty, which Human Rights Watch opposes in all circumstances. Some cases have resulted in acquittals. A criminal court in Minya recommended the death penalty for over 1,200 people in preliminary verdicts in two separate cases in March and April 2014 without allowing defendants the right to mount a meaningful defense or even assess whether they had counsel or were present in the courtroom, falling far short of ascertaining their guilt individually. Many of these sentences were commuted in the final verdict, some resulting in lengthy prison terms and others in acquittals.

Prosecutors have ordered the pretrial detention of most of those arrested pending investigation on a range of cut-and-paste charges, including incitement or participation in violence, “thuggery,” vandalism, membership in a banned or terrorist organization, and illegal public assembly.Prosecutors in dozens of cases reviewed by Human Rights Watch have renewed pre-trial detention orders on the basis of little evidence that would warrant prosecution, effectively detaining them arbitrarily for months on end. Mounting reports indicate that scores of detainees have faced torture and ill-treatment in detention. In one incident on August 18, 2013, four days after the Rab’a and al-Nahda dispersals, Egyptian police outside the Abu Zaabel prison in Cairo lobbed teargas canisters into the back of a cramped police truck, in which 45 prisoners had been huddled together for six hours in temperatures bordering 40C, resulting in the deaths of 37 men.

Military officials held Morsy along with nine senior aides in secret military detention for months. Police also arrested the majority of the high-level and much of the mid-level leadership both of the Muslim Brotherhood and of its political party, the Freedom and Justice Party, across the country, including figures exclusively involved in politics and communications.

Following the military’s ouster of Morsy in early July, an intense campaign of arrest and detention largely focused on members and sympathizers of the Muslim Brotherhood. According to the government’s own figures, security forces have detained at least 22,000 people since July. WikiThawra, an initiative run by the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights, has determined that authorities have arrested or indicted over 41,000 since July 3, 2013. Many of those detained were rounded up solely as a result of their peaceful exercise of the rights to peaceful assembly, free association, and free expression or membership in the Muslim Brotherhood, including simply displaying signs commemorating the Rab’a massacre.

Under President Morsy, police arrested at least 800 protesters at various demonstrations across Egypt. In one incident outside the presidential palace in December 2012, credible accounts victims and witnesses gave to Human Rights Watch indicate that supporters of the president subjected dozens of persons to abuse. Security forces failed to intervene to protect the peaceful sit-in by anti-Morsy protesters and stop the violence by both pro- and anti-Morsy demonstrators.

The use of excessive force escalated significantly with the overthrow of Morsy in July 2013 as the military and security forces embarked on a campaign of intense and extensive repression against the Muslim Brotherhood, as well as non-Islamist critics of the new government. This report focuses on the mass killings of July and August 2013. During the same period, Egypt experienced bloody acts of communal violence that often pitted pro-Morsy supporters against supporters of the interim government and sectarian attacks against Coptic Christians. Security forces subsequently have continued to use excessive lethal force, including in dispersing pro-Morsy marches on October 6, leading to at least 57 deaths, and on the third anniversary of January 25, 2014, killing at least 64 protesters across Egypt.

Under the 18-month rule of the SCAF, new incidents of violent dispersals of protest took place, including the killings of 27 unarmed Coptic Christian protesters outside the government television building known as Maspero in October 2011, and 51 protesters on Mohamed Mahmoud Street in November 2011. Under Mohamed Morsy, police killed 46 protesters outside the Port Said prison over three days in January 2013.

Since January 2011, Egyptian security forces repeatedly used excessive lethal force to disperse protests, killing well over 2,000 protesters. Between January 25 and February 11, 2011, during the course of the 18-days of mass protests across Egypt calling for the end of the Mubarak government, police killed at least 846 demonstrators in squares and near police stations in Cairo, Alexandria, Suez, and other cities.

In January 2011, Egyptians took to the streets protesting police brutality and demanding bread, freedom, and social justice. Although the 18-day uprising succeeded in toppling President Hosni Mubarak, human rights violations remained a serious concern under successive regimes—the Supreme Council for the Armed Forces (SCAF) from February 2011-June 2012 and Mohamed Morsy from June 2012-June 2013. Since the ouster of Morsy on July 3, 2013, under both the military backed interim government which took power then and the government headed by President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi which took power in June 2014, Egypt has experienced a human rights crisis as dire as in any other period in the country’s modern history, including mass killings of protesters, large-scale death sentences, and mass arrests of the political opposition.

II. The Dispersals at Rab’a al-Adawiya and al-Nahda Squares

Both in the lead-up to the June 30, 2013 anti-government protests called for by the protest group Tamarod and in the aftermath of the military’s ouster of Mohamed Morsy on July 3, 2013, thousands of Egyptians staged demonstrations throughout Egypt to show support for Morsy. Located just kilometers away from the Presidential Palace, Rab’a al-Adawiya Mosque in the Nasr City neighborhood of eastern Cairo was transformed after July 3 into the epicenter of their protest, as organizers declared an open-ended sit-in until the military resorted Morsy to the presidency. Brotherhood supporters also maintained a second smaller encampment in al-Nahda Square in Giza in greater Cairo.

Human Rights Watch visited the two protest sites, both of which were densely populated with women and children as well as men, on several occasions prior to the dispersals. Using aerial photos, Human Rights Watch calculated that there were approximately 85,000 protesters at the Rab’a sit-in alone on August 2. One video shows aerial footage of the sit-in that evening.

From the first days of the sit-ins, the government raised the possibility of dispersal, citing the need to halt the detention and abuse of non-Brotherhood members that they alleged was taking place within the sit-ins, the disruption of traffic and disturbance to residents of the sit-in areas, and the incitement and sectarianism of Brotherhood leaders. On July 31, citing what it called a popular mandate to “fight violence and terrorism,” the Egyptian cabinet authorized the interior minister to “take all necessary measures to face these dangers and put an end to them within the framework of the constitution and the law.” In the days leading up to the dispersal, security officials promised a gradual dispersal, which would include warnings and a safe exit.

These precautions were not taken. On August 14, authorities used deliberate and indiscriminate lethal force to disperse the two sit-ins, where protesters had remained encamped for 45 days, resulting in one of the most bloody incidents of mass unlawful killings of largely peaceful protesters in recent history. While Egyptian security forces have repeatedly since 2011 used excessive force to respond to demonstrations, the August 14 dispersals were unprecedented in the scale of sheer brutality.

By the end of that day, the police in concert with the army had killed at least 904 people during the dispersals, at least 817 from Rab’a and 87 from al-Nahda, including women and children. In September, Prime Minister al-Beblawy told the Egyptian daily Al-Masry al-Youm that the death toll from the Rab’a and al-Nahda square dispersals on August 14 was “close to 1,000.” Ten members of the security forces were also killed—eight in Rab’a and two in Nahda. Although some protesters were armed and shot at the police, Human Rights Watch concluded that they were few in numbers based on 132 interviews with protesters, local residents, medics, and journalists from both incidents, and review of hours of video footage.

Following its year-long investigation, Human Rights Watch has further concluded that the government used disproportionate force, failed to take measures to minimize loss of life, and knowingly opened fire on unarmed protesters with live ammunition, therein committing serious violations of international human rights laws. The systematic and widespread nature of the deliberate and indiscriminate killings, coupled with evidence indicating that the government anticipated and planned to engage in mass unlawful killings, i.e. murder, and that they fit into a consistent pattern of protester killings, indicate that the violations likely amount to crimes against humanity. One year later, authorities have made no effort to investigate or otherwise hold police and army officers and other officials accountable for their actions.

Forcible Dispersal of the Rab’a Sit-in

Overview

Rab’a al-Adawiya square lies at the intersection of Nasr Street, a major artery connecting downtown Cairo to its international airport, and Tayaran Street in the eastern Cairo district of Nasr City. Demonstrators occupied the roughly one kilometer stretch of road on Nasr Street, stretching from Yousif Abbas Street in the west to Tiba Mall in the east, as well as a roughly half-kilometer stretch of Tayaran Street and parts of intersecting side streets. The square is named after the mosque located in the center of the square and is surrounded by residential and government buildings, including a military base in the northeast quadrant of the square, the Traffic Directorate building of the Interior Ministry on the east side of Nasr Street, and a Defense Ministry building on the southwest corner of the square.

The dispersal of the Rab’a sit-in—a 12-hour assault lasting from sunrise to sunset—marked the single bloodiest event in the government’s brutal crackdown on dissent since the July 3 ouster of Morsy. Police and army forces attacked the protest encampment at each of its five major entrances—two entrances on Nasr Street, two on Tayaran Street, and one on Anwar al-Mufti Street—with APCs and bulldozers and with government snipers on the tops of surrounding buildings. Thirty-one witnesses also said they saw security forces fire teargas, birdshot, or live ammunition from helicopters hovering over the square. Security forces besieged demonstrators, leaving them without access to safe exit from the first minutes of the dispersal until the very end of the day, including for severely injured protesters in need of urgent medical attention and men, women, and children desperate to escape the violence.

Security forces failed to provide sufficient warning in advance of the dispersal. Warnings in the days ahead did not specify a date and time during which the dispersal would take place. Minutes before opening fire early on the morning of August 14, security forces played pre-recorded loops, calling on protesters to leave and identifying a safe exit, over loudspeakers near at least two of the entrances to the square. The vast majority of the over 100 witnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch, however, said they did not hear the warning until after forces had opened fire. Many of those in the square only came to know of the dispersal after being awoken by other demonstrators or by the sound and smell of teargas and gunfire at the entrances to the square.

Police commenced their assault by lobbing teargas canisters and using other less than lethal forms of riot control against protesters located near the entrances to the square, but they quickly, within minutes in places, escalated to live fire. Brotherhood organizers had established security committees at the entrances, which had erected makeshift fences to slow the approach of forces. Police forces, though, destroyed the makeshift fences and other structures in their path. Many protesters took cover in the central area of the square, which remained relatively safe, except for teargas, until the late morning. The situation on side streets greatly varied from location to location—some, such as Sibawayh al-Masry Street, remained relatively safe for most of the day—but could only be accessed after braving gunfire from one of the five major entrances.

Advancing forces and snipers on top of buildings intensified fire over the course of the morning, at times firing continuously for minutes at a time without pause. The main entrance to the Rab’a hospital, which protesters referred to as “Sniper Alley,” was the target of sniper fire for much of the day, posing serious risk to those seeking medical attention. Many of the protesters who did not take cover and stayed at the peripheries joined the protester security committees and threw stones and Molotov cocktails at advancing forces and, in some cases, carried sticks and clubs. Some protesters also carried firearms and shot at the police; the number of armed men, though, was limited, according to the accounts of witnesses. By around 9-10 a.m., these makeshift defense strategies, concentrated at strategic points at the entrances, succeeded in temporarily slowing the advance of forces.

After a brief mid-day period when clashes diminished, security forces, in coordination with snipers, intensified their fire and made their final advance into the heart of the square. Many were killed in these final hours, with no part of the square protected from prevalent gunfire. Security forces opened fire at structures that had turned into makeshift medical facilities, including Rab’a hospital, the field hospital, and the courtyard adjacent to Rab’a mosque. By around 5:30 p.m., police had encircled remaining protesters around Rab’a mosque and hospital, eventually allowing the majority of those remaining to exit, with instructions to leave corpses and the injured behind. As the last protesters left the square, the central stage, field hospital, mosque, and first floor of the hospital were set ablaze, likely by security forces. Police detained over 800 protesters over the course of the day, some of whom they beat, tortured, and, in several cases, summarily executed.

The operation involved close cooperation between the police and the army. The police, consisting of both the Central Security Forces (CSF), Egypt’s riot police, and the Special Forces (ESF), who usually are reserved for specialized operations, took the lead role during the dispersal and appear to be responsible for most of the lethal force used. While difficult to distinguish between the CSF and ESF given the similar armament both forces wore during the dispersal, Interior Minister Ibrahim has said that ESF led the final push into Rab’a Square. The army also played an important supporting role. Army forces secured the entrances, inhibiting protesters from entering and exiting, operated the bulldozers that cleared the way for police to advance, operated some helicopters, including Apaches, which flew over the square, and opened a military base adjacent to Rab’a Square to snipers.

Nasr Street, Tiba Mall (East Entrance)

The dispersal commenced from the east with the arrival of security forces on Nasr Street near Tiba Mall and on Anwar al-Mufti Street, a parallel street behind Tiba Mall, at around 6:15-6:30 a.m. Human Rights Watch interviewed 26 witnesses near the Tiba Mall entrance to Rab’a Square and none heard any warning or siren before the dispersal began.

Many of these witnesses came to know that security forces were forcibly dispersing protesters only when the operation was already underway. Asma Shehata, a young protester, told Human Rights Watch that she had been walking to her parked car near Tiba Mall when she suddenly saw gas falling around her. A leader of the group Youth Against the Coup said he awoke from the tent he had sleeping in a little after 6 a.m. upon hearing fire all around him and immediately ran towards the center of the square.

Security forces began their assault by lobbing teargas canisters from Anwar al-Mufti Street onto Nasr Street and by firing from positions on top of the Military Intelligence building in the adjacent army base, witnesses told Human Rights Watch. A 19-year-old videographer told Human Rights Watch that he first noticed snipers in the base at 2 or 3 a.m. that morning, fortifying their defenses. The snipers began firing from the first minutes of the dispersal.

Four protesters recounted to Human Rights Watch witnessing fire from the army base strike a member of Ultras Nahdawy, a youth group supportive of Morsy. A high school student who had been sleeping near Tiba Mall described to Human Rights Watch how he saw an officer from the base “spot [name redacted] and hit him in the leg with a teargas canister,” which caused him to fall.

Snipers deployed on top of the base supported security forces advancing west towards the center of the square on Nasr Street from near Tiba Mall. According to witnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch, forces moved in formations: first, a large Caterpillar bulldozer, equipped with metal tank tracks instead of wheels, would clear the path, “plowing through anything in its way,” including sandbags and makeshift rock walls set up by demonstrators to slow the advance. APCs manned by the ESF flanked the bulldozer. CSF police trucks followed behind, while army forces secured the periphery and blocked new protesters from entering the square.

Members of the Brotherhood security committee in charge of the Tiba Mall entrance interviewed by Human Rights Watch said that they hid behind sandbags and used a variety of strategies to try to slow the advance. According to witnesses, many protesters threw rocks and later Molotov cocktails at approaching security forces. Some burned tires, whereas others used fireworks in order to intimidate forces as they advanced.

Advancing forces and snipers acting in tandem very quickly resorted to using birdshot and live fire, witnesses said. According to the high school student who had witnessed the incident, the same member of the Ultras Nahdawy was hit at approximately 6:30 a.m. by a live bullet in the pelvis, though he did not see where the fire came from. Injured protester Mohamed Ali told Human Rights Watch on August 14, as he lay with his right leg bloodied and bandaged in the Rab’a hospital, that he had been standing next to his tent, towards the front of Nasr Street, when police moved in and shot him in his right leg above the knee.

A father of three and member of one of the Brotherhood security committees in charge of protecting the field hospital on Nasr Street west of Tiba Mall described hearing live fire “in rapid succession” minutes after seeing teargas. Shehata recalled hearing “a quick succession of bullets” not more than 10 minutes after first seeing teargas.

One man, who sought to make his way to the field hospital in the center of the square, described how the snipers in the army base began to shoot indiscriminately at protesters shortly after gunfire began:

I saw one or two officers on top of the military intelligence building on the northern side of Nasr Street, opposite the Tiba Mall. We call it Unit 75. Another one or two were standing on top of the interior ministry traffic building on the same side of Nasr Street as Tiba Mall. They were like snipers but they were firing randomly. They were hiding behind sandbags on top of the building. They’d stand up to shoot then hide again. They kept doing this: shoot, then hide.

A video reviewed by Human Rights Watch shows a female protester shot in the neck while holding a handheld video camera in the morning on eastern Nasr Street.

Another witness, a businessman participating in the sit-in, said:

They immediately fired teargas and live fire. It was so intense, I can’t even describe it; it was not like the other times before [referring to prior mass killings], one or two at a time. It was raining bullets. I smelled the gas and immediately saw people being hit and falling down around me. I have no idea how many people were hit. We didn’t hear any warnings, nothing. It was like hell.

Habiba Abd al-Aziz, a 26-year-old staff reporter for Xpress, a sister publication of the UAE-based Gulf News, was one of those who fell as forces advanced from Tiba Mall. At 7:33 a.m. Abd al-Aziz sent a text message to her mother to tell her that she was heading to the front lines from the center of the square “in a little while.” She had brought her camera with her to cover the advance, two witnesses hold Human Rights Watch. A friend of Habiba told Human Rights Watch, “Police were shooting left and right...Habiba was holding a camera and a tripod. I told her to move. She wasn’t listening and wouldn’t move. I saw her fall.” A journalist who witnessed the shooting also recounted that Abd al-Aziz had been shot after rushing to the front lines in her capacity as a journalist to document the clashes. Abd al-Aziz died as a result of her injuries. Her mother messaged her at 12:46 p.m. to say, “Habiba, please reassure me. I’ve called thousands of times. Please, my darling, I’m worried sick. Tell me how you are.”

Statements from the Interior Ministry on the morning of August 14 maintaining that no bullets had yet been fired and thereafter insisting there were no casualties on the eastern side of Nasr Street until security forces had arrived at the center of square, are inconsistent with Human Rights Watch’s documentation.

Outflanked, pro-Morsy protesters at the front lines gradually retreated backwards towards the center of the square. As forces advanced down Nasr Street, they destroyed structures in their path, including an iconic three-story wooden tent demonstrators had built on the east side of the square. A young father from Alexandria who managed to enter Rab’a Square through side roads shortly after the dispersal began found himself “the only one” behind the advancing forces on Nasr Street. He told Human Rights Watch that the bulldozer had “destroyed everything” and that CSF officers, who had advanced behind the ESF, were rummaging through half-destroyed tents in search of valuables to steal.

By around 10 a.m., forces had advanced to the Traffic Directorate building, an Interior Ministry building adjacent to the Rab’a field hospital and mosque. One protester, who had gone inside a building off Nasr Street at around 8:30 a.m. to escape the teargas, described to Human Rights Watch the scene when she went out at around 10 a.m.:

I went out, and it was the shock of my life. They were no tents. They were all burned. When I went in, the street was full of tents. The square had become a piece of coal.

Pro-Morsy protesters, though, regrouped. Concentrating several hundred protesters near the Traffic Directorate building, demonstrators built makeshift fences to hold back the advance of forces and fought back with rocks and Molotov cocktails. One protester told Human Rights Watch that he also saw at least one shotgun with birdshot among the demonstrators. He described the makeshift strategy they employed, which contributed to keeping security forces from advancing for several hours:

APCs continued to hit continuously, and forces approached with birdshot. We took pots for protection from the cooking area…found fridges for defense…and would approach from the side of Nasr Street, throw rocks, and retreat…. They didn’t know how to get through us…. Things continued back and forth like this.

Egyptian freelance journalist Maged Atef told Human Rights Watch that around mid-day he saw a police officer, who had come on foot with a microphone to tell protesters to leave the central part of Rab’a Square, shot on the eastern side of Nasr Street. The National Council for Human Rights report on Rab’a highlights this event, which the report author said was largely based on an interview with Atef, and identifies it as a main factor behind the escalation of shooting by security forces in the late morning period in this area.

Human Rights Watch cannot establish precisely when the shooting took place.

There did, however, appear to be intensification of shooting in the late morning, with many protesters falling. One protester, a college student studying engineering, told Human Rights Watch that she decided to move from the center of the square to near the Traffic Directorate building at around 10:30 a.m. to assist those on the front lines by breaking pavement to make rocks to use against advancing forces. While doing so, she met Warda Mustafa, whose daughters she knew, around 11:15 a.m. She recounted to Human Rights Watch what happened next:

I was saying goodbye to her, and [the guys] told us to get down. Forces were shooting low, and Warda was not sitting, but lying down. Suddenly, around her head cover, her brains fell out in front of me.

Another protester, who also saw Mustafa fall, provided a similar account to Human Rights Watch. Mustafa eventually succumbed to her injuries, dying on August 18, according to the death certificate reviewed by Human Rights Watch.

Shortly thereafter, protesters surged forward in an effort to push back security forces. Ahmed Ammar, a civil engineer and a member of the Rab’a field hospital security committee, encouraged the group to keep up their resistance, Ammar’s wife Yasmeen Abdel Fattah and three protesters who were on the front lines with Ammar told Human Right Watch. A 17-year-old, who had been using a slingshot to repel forces and considered Ammar a fatherly figure, described the scene that ensued:

Ahmed stood up, went past the gates [we had erected], put up his arms, and said, ‘We are peaceful. There is nothing here’. Then, an Interior Ministry officer—who was wearing black, Special Forces, and carrying a rifle—loaded his gun to fire. I stood to try to push Ahmed out of the way. I was only a step away, but I couldn’t move. I could only call his name. The officer got him in the chest with four bullets, and he fell.

Two other witnesses provided corroborating accounts of Ammar’s fall. He died immediately, leaving behind his wife and three children between one and ten years old.

In the early afternoon, some shooting from snipers deployed on top of buildings and firing of teargas continued, but security forces temporarily halted their advance on Nasr Street. The de-escalation may have in part resulted from some police having to move back to the Tiba Mall entrance to prevent additional pro-Morsy supporters from entering the sit-in.

However, at around 3 p.m. the security forces made a final push to reach the center of the square. A chemist, who witnessed events from the entrance to the Traffic Directorate building, described the intensity of the fire he saw then:

I stood by the building…it was 2:50 or 2:55 p.m…. Then suddenly I saw intense fire from all directions. For ten minutes, there was no one on the street. Then I saw a woman and man walking towards the security forces. They were the only people on the ground. Then I heard bullets and saw the woman on the ground. The man tried to carry her and also took a bullet and fell. We were not able to get their bodies because of the bulldozer.

Another protester described seeing the security forces shooting wildly shortly thereafter:

One of the APCs turned very fast, so that it faced us with its side. When that APC turned and fired, I ducked and started to run. I saw the head of a guy next to me explode. We didn’t have weapons. All we had were stones. I saw [snipers in] the helicopters firing on people; once or twice I saw the door of the helicopter open, someone fire, then the door close.

In order to avoid the approaching APCs, many of the protesters retreated to the side road between the Traffic Directorate building and the Rab’a field hospital, some hiding in tents or behind sandbags. Additional snipers, though, soon began firing from on top of the Traffic Directorate and surrounding buildings. According to a protester who had been hiding in a tent, the bullets entered tents and other previously secured areas, forcing the remaining protesters to head into the central square. Nearly 11 hours after beginning their advance, forces arrived in the center of Rab’a Square from the east.

Anwar al-Mufti Street (Parallel to East Nasr Street, Behind Tiba Mall )

Running parallel to the eastern stretch of Nasr Street, Anwar al-Mufti Street stands as a key entry point to the central section of Rab’a Square. The street, lined by cafes and shops, runs behind Tiba Mall and the Traffic Directorate building, connecting to Nasr Street between the Traffic Directorate and central Rab’a Square, and extends to the Rab’a hospital and Tayaran Street. As a result of its strategic significance, Brotherhood demonstrators established several security checkpoints on the street.

Security forces entered Anwar al-Mufti Street from Abbas Akkad Street, a street that runs perpendicular to Nasr Street, around 6 a.m. As it was a narrower street without as many protester tents, APCs, not bulldozers, led the advance. An engineering student who was positioned at the second security checkpoint on Anwar al-Mufti Street told Human Rights Watch that at around 6:20 a.m., in the first minutes of the dispersal, security forces lobbed about a dozen teargas canisters onto Nasr Street and at demonstrators on the front lines of Anwar al-Mufti Street. One local resident, who lives a few blocks from Anwar al-Mufti resident, said that she felt teargas in her home by 6:45 a.m.

Within 10-15 minutes, security forces began to fire birdshot and live ammunition, according to eleven demonstrators on the front lines interviewed by Human Rights Watch. Human Rights Watch reviewed footage depicting heavy gunfire on Anwar al-Mufti in the early morning and interviewed the videographer who said that he recorded the scene from behind a sandbag. Two 19-year-old protesters, who lived in the area and arrived on the scene at 7 a.m. upon hearing that the dispersal had commenced, described seeing live fire immediately upon arriving on Anwar al-Mufti Street.

A 26-year-old protester said that just before 7 a.m. he was on Anwar al-Mufti Street when the police started moving in with teargas:

We heard the sound of gunshots straight away with the teargas. I tried to hide because the shooting was everywhere. While I was there, I saw three people being shot and falling to the ground, [including] one shot in the eye and one in the side.

A 21-year-old from the Manufiya Province told Human Rights Watch about how he got injured in the midst of this early fire:

I was between two tents helping people to deal with teargas. Fire was continuous. One second I felt an odd feeling in my leg, then pain in my pelvis. I was on Anwar al-Mufti [Street] turning to pick up a Pepsi bottle [used to mitigate effects of gas] and suddenly felt pain. We all fell, six of us, in a matter of seconds… I put my hand on my chest and it was hot… I couldn’t feel my chest at all. The bullet had come from the back… I saw blood on my hand and was heavily bleeding… The bullet came close to my heart.

The APCs attempted to advance, but were unable to penetrate rows of cars and buses that protesters had lined up, witnesses said. One protester observed an APC attempt to push past at 8:30 a.m., but get a flat tire driving over nails protesters had set up, and back up amidst a hailstorm of rocks thrown by protesters. Protesters on Anwar al-Mufti Street later also used Molotov cocktails, according to a 24-year-old chemist who was among the demonstrators. One demonstrator also said he noticed several demonstrators with guns in a building off Anwar al-Mufti in the late morning.

Gunfire intensified in the mid-morning, so strongly, according to one protester, that it penetrated the sandbags protesters had been crouched behind. A 24-year-old from Giza told Human Rights Watch that he saw machine gun fire coming from the APCs and saw five people fall in the 15 minutes he spent on Anwar al-Mufti Street that morning. A 21-year-old pharmaceutical studies student whom security forces had detained and were holding in the middle of the Anwar al-Mufti Street from around 8 to 11 a.m. recounted seeing forces fire a gun on top of an APC in the mid-morning. He described what happened as the fire approached him at around 10-10:30 a.m.:

The shots approached us, even though our hands were up. The person next to me took a bullet in his head. He asked for permission to enter the square and die there and [the police] allowed him to do so… I took a birdshot pellet in my lip, which opened it up.

Fifteen protesters told Human Rights Watch that snipers positioned on top of the Traffic Directorate building supported the approaching forces. While the snipers largely directed fire at the western part of Anwar Al-Mufti Street, near the entrance to Rab’a hospital, they also supported forces from the east. Ain Shams University professor Mustafa Sharif said he had been hiding from sniper fire in Sibawayh al-Masry Street, which runs parallel to Anwar al-Mufti Street near Rab’a al-Adawiya school, at around 8:30 a.m., and saw five people shot and fall to the ground. Their presence made it very dangerous to cross “Sniper Alley” for much of the day.

Security forces halted their advance at mid-day, although fire from snipers deployed on surrounding buildings continued. But, in parallel with their final push on Nasr Street, forces intensified their fire at around 3 p.m. One protester recalled security forces arbitrarily firing up and down the street. Another protester, who had holed up with around 40 others in a tent just outside a security checkpoint off Anwar al-Mufti Street, described how fire from machine guns and snipers on top of the Traffic Directorate suddenly “rained” over the tent. Feeling exposed, with snipers able to see them through the open roof of the tent, the group quickly retreated into the courtyard adjacent to the Rab’a mosque, dodging heavy fire. The protester, who only saw 10 of the 40 people he had been hiding alongside when he arrived in the courtyard minutes later, is unsure what happened to the rest of the group. Security forces had full control of Anwar al-Mufti Street by around 4:30 p.m.

Nasr Street, Manassa (West Entrance)

On the opposite western side of Nasr Street, the Rab’a sit-in extended to the intersection with Yousif Abbas Street, just past the large fountain and Mobil Gas station at the end of the road. Further to the west, Nasr Street leads to the Manassa, the stage Sadat spoke from the day he was assassinated in 1981, the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, a section of al-Azhar University, and the October 6 Bridge, which connects eastern Cairo to downtown.

During pre-recorded warnings played at some of the entrances to Rab’a, authorities identified this entry point as a “safe exit,” calling on protesters to leave from here and promising that no-one would be arrested. This part of the square, though, was the site of continuous fire throughout the day; as one local resident who did not participate in the sit-in told Human Rights, “sounds of gunshots and teargas didn’t stop from 6:20 a.m…until the attack stopped after 6 p.m.”

Egyptian freelance journalist Maged Atef, who stood near Yousif Abbas Street for much of the morning, said he saw a few demonstrators leave, but most of them stayed put as a result of gunfire and concern that “safe exits” were a trap to arrest them on their way out. One Egyptian photojournalist said that when he reached the Nasr Street exit at 8:15 a.m., he saw police arrest some bearded protesters leaving the sit-in.

Security forces began to approach this entrance to the sit-in around 5:30-6 a.m. Atef said that he heard the police loudspeaker playing a pre-recorded warning around 6:15 a.m. However, three protesters interviewed by Human Rights Watch who said they were in the same area said they did not hear the warning at that time.

At approximately 6:20 a.m., security forces began to fire teargas, according to witnesses. A lawyer, awoken from his tent at 6:10 a.m. by protester warnings that dispersal was imminent, reported smelling teargas as he prayed minutes later. A woman who lives several hundred meters from the intersection of Yousif Abbas and Nasr Streets told Human Rights Watch that she felt teargas inside her house by 6:40 a.m.

Around 6:30 a.m., some 100 demonstrators left the sit-in entrance down Yousif Abbas Street in order to see what exactly was headed their way, one of the men who was part of this group told Human Rights Watch. He said that the group encountered two bulldozers with tank-like tracks, four APCs carrying officers, and at least 50 police officers on foot. Another witness provided a similar account of the advancing formation. The two men further outlined how bulldozers quickly removed the makeshift barriers that demonstrators had erected and forces began almost immediately firing teargas, less than lethal riot control guns, and live ammunition. Protesters responded largely by throwing rocks, but, with no protection outside of the square, 20-30 of them fell, according to one of the men. Human Rights Watch reviewed a video from around this time and it largely corroborated the accounts from witnesses, though it was not clear from the video that security forces were firing live ammunition.

Protesters quickly retreated, and security forces advanced until they arrived near the sit-in entrance on Nasr Street at 6:45 a.m. Forces attacked from both sides of Yousif Abbas Street, as well as from the October 6 Bridge side of Nasr Street, firing the same mix of weapons into the sit-in, witnesses said. One protester observed a man who he believed was not affiliated with the Rab’a sit-in wave at the police from nearby train tracks and take a bullet in his head around 6:45 a.m. Journalist Mohamed Hamdy said he was filming on Yousif Abbas Street at 7 a.m. when a man standing next to him was shot in the chest and fell to the ground.

In order to prevent forces from entering the square, demonstrators gathered inside the nearby Mobil gas station, since the structure shielded them from incoming fire and allowed them a safe place from where they could throw rocks at advancing forces. A pharmacy student at al-Azhar University told Human Rights Watch that protesters threw rocks, sometimes with slingshots, from the gas station and from behind sandbags and makeshift walls on Nasr Street. Journalist Maged Atef said that he saw one homemade shotgun with birdshot among protesters in the area, but no other weapons. No other witnesses, including locals not affiliated with the Brotherhood, saw any other arms on protesters in this area at this point, they said.

These efforts succeeded in preventing forces from entering Nasr Street until 10:30-11 a.m., but it came at a significant cost to protesters. One protester described to Human Rights Watch the killing of two protesters he witnessed at around 8:30 a.m.

I saw a woman who was wearing black and taking pictures fall. I found later that she took a bullet in the neck. I then saw one man standing by the fountain in the middle of Nasr Street on Yousif Abbas. It was a tough scene. He took a bullet in his shoulder and fell. He tried to get up and got one in the leg. He began to crawl, as blood trickled down. He was the only person up front and kept taking bullets in the arm and chest. He took at least eight bullets. The bullet would come, he would shake, and then not move…we tried to drag him to safety, but weren’t able to [for some time] because of the fire.

Another protester, who had been breaking pavement to provide rocks to the front lines, described how a group of youth from the group Youth Against the Coup had been throwing rocks from behind sandbags on the front lines. At around 10 a.m., he said, he witnessed security forces climbing over the sandbags and shooting the protesters at close range with birdshot. He also saw bulldozers lift sandbags and drop them on top of the demonstrators. According to him security forces briefly paused their fire later to allow protesters to collect the bodies of those killed.

Another protester, who was among the group that went to collect the bodies, said he recalled seeing about 20 corpses. He described the scene to Human Rights Watch:

We found a pile of bodies over each other. They were all dead, no injured. The barricade was made of sandbags and the sand got mixed with the blood. It was clear that the APCs had passed over limbs. We found limbs that were totally crushed. There were people with no arms, obviously an APC ran over them. Imagine you are carrying piles of bodies, it is something you can’t imagine. Even the bodies that you are carrying, you carry an arm of a person, alongside the leg of another person. The scene was very difficult.

As the morning progressed, security forces began firing more intensely, and snipers began to appear and fire from adjacent government buildings. One demonstrator who had been transporting the injured from Yousif Abbas Street to the field hospital described “relentless” fire from APCs that “made things shake.” Another protester described hearing gunfire come from the adjacent Central Authority for Organization and Administration building and then looking ahead and seeing the man in front of him fall and his brain “come out into his hands.”

An activist from Mansoura had come down Nasr Street to check on a photo panorama of images of deceased demonstrators from earlier protests she helped administer near Yousif Abbas Street. As she walked, she said she noticed a helicopter flying very low—at about the height of a three-story building—that stopped near her. She told Human Rights Watch that she began to run and, as she slid into a tent, a gunman in the plane shot birdshot pellets into her leg, injuring her. Another protester told Human Rights Watch that he saw helicopters dropping teargas earlier in the morning.

As a result of this push, security forces took over part of Nasr Street by 11 a.m., having succeeded in forcing protesters out of the Mobil gas station, and more or less secured the Yousif Abbas entrance to Nasr Street by around 1 p.m. Gunfire became less intense shortly thereafter, according to protesters and locals, but picked up significantly at around 3 p.m.

However, unlike their advance on the east side of Nasr Street, security forces did not push into the square. Instead, snipers on top of buildings repeatedly opened fire into crowds of demonstrators, local residents and protesters told Human Rights Watch. A university student described the chaos around the tent he had been hiding in at about 3:30 p.m.:

I saw an old man inside the tent take a bullet in the chest and fall. The bullet came from nearby buildings. I ran to the square, walking low. Snipers were everywhere, and I didn’t know how to move. I saw one tent with six martyrs. There was someone crouched next to me with blood on his face. I didn’t know what to do, as I couldn’t take bodies or injured people, because the snipers would hit me…it was over. I thought I would die, not get arrested, since they came to kill.

When security forces eventually arrived at the center of Rab’a Square and took control, they again played pre-recorded warnings calling for protesters to leave from the west entrance of Nasr Street towards Manassa, several witnesses said. A local resident, with a view overlooking this exit, told Human Rights Watch about the scene she saw when protesters began leaving from this exit:

At 3 p.m., protesters were coming out in lines, around tens of them, maybe 80 total. Security forces were firing at the ground just to scare them and force them to move faster at the end of the street…. At 4:30 p.m., I saw policemen hitting [two guys in their early 20’s] with the back of their rifle until I couldn’t see them…. At 4:45 p.m., I saw four policemen shooting at a human’s height, not to the ground as before…. They kept on shooting for at least three minutes nonstop at the four of them. And when they were done, they collected all the remains of the bullets from the floor.

One protester, who had spent the day defending the west entrance of Nasr Street, described the “terror” he felt exiting the square for the final time, as gunmen in APCs shot over people and as forces flashed victory signs and hurled insults at the protesters. Ultimately, even as security forces finally allowed protesters to exit from west Nasr Street at the end of day, they failed to secure it and turn it into the “safe exit” that had been promised.

Tayaran Street, Republican Guard (North Entrance)

Bisecting Nasr Street, Tayaran Street runs north to south. On the north side, the road has a military base on one side and a residential neighborhood to the other, and provides an outlet to Salah Salem Street, a major highway that runs parallel to Nasr Street, and the Republican Guard headquarters.

As at other entrances, security forces made their initial approach around 6 a.m., heading south on Tayaran Street from Salah Salem Street. Freelance journalist Maged Atef, who went to Salah Salem Street at 6:30 a.m. to make sure he could get out safely if he needed to, noticed that army soldiers had already arrested a handful of “bearded men” who had tried to leave the demonstration. Shortly thereafter, Atef saw security forces fire the first teargas canisters on protesters on the front lines down Tayaran Street.

Within 15 minutes, security forces began using live fire, in addition to teargas. Mohamed Tareq, a zoology professor from Alexandria, and a 19-year-old college student from Cairo, both awoke from their tents on the northern part of Tayaran Street at 6:45 a.m. to the simultaneous sounds of live fire and teargas. The heavy teargas overwhelmed many of the demonstrators. One protester told Human Rights Watch that the teargas caused him to lose consciousness.Tareq said that many around him were choking from it. As he helped those around him deal with the gas, Tareq noticed that several birdshot pellets had struck him.

By 7:30 a.m., Tareq told Human Rights Watch that security forces were “arbitrarily shooting all around.” As Tareq turned to face the square, three bullets penetrated his body, one in his arm, one that went into his back and through his chest, and a third that struck him in the side, he said. He fell and was immediately carted away to the Rab’a field hospital. One protester said that many retreated during this period to the center of the square, which at the time was still comparatively safe.

Security forces slowly advanced behind bulldozers, which destroyed blockades erected by demonstrators. Two witnesses told Human Rights Watch that protesters attempted to slow the advance by lobbing rocks, Molotov cocktails, and fireworks, but to little avail. By around 10:30-11 a.m., security forces had arrived roughly 200 meters from the stage, according to one protester. After a brief lull in firing around midday, security forces quickly completed their advance, forcing the few remaining protesters into the center of the square.

Tayaran Street, Manufiya Building (South Entrance)

The southern part of Tayaran Street, which leads into the heart of Nasr City in eastern Cairo, witnessed some of the heaviest firing in all of Rab’a Square on August 14. While the protest encampment extended past the KFC Restaurant near Ibn Hani al-Andalusi Street, much of the violence took place in front of a building under construction that demonstrators referred to as the Manufiya Building. The ten-story building, named after the province from which the members of the Brotherhood security committee in charge of security at this entrance hailed, lies at the outlet of Sibawayh al-Masry Street, a side street that provides direct access to the Rab’a hospital.

Security forces began playing a looped pre-recorded warning around 6:30-6:40 a.m. on southern Tayaran Street calling on protesters to vacate the area, identifying a “safe exit,” and stating that no one who attempted to leave via the safe exit would be arrested. While several in the area said they heard the warning then, the majority of the 19 protesters whom Human Rights Watch interviewed who were located at this entrance said they did not hear it until later in the morning. One resident who lives off Tayaran Street told Human Rights Watch that from around 8 a.m. onwards, she heard loudspeaker announcements calling on protesters to leave the sit-in.

Almost simultaneously, security forces began to attack demonstrators on the edges of the street with teargas and birdshot, five demonstrators on the front lines told Human Rights Watch. One protester estimated that forces lobbed fifty canisters a minute at the beginning of the dispersal.

Bulldozers led the advance of APCs and police vans, pushing through makeshift barriers of rock, sand, and rows of cars that demonstrators had set up at the entrance. By around 7:30-8 a.m., protesters at the scene said that security forces began using live ammunition, which they described as “arbitrary” and “random,” as the forces pushed north from Tayaran Street and intersecting side streets. By 8:30-9 a.m., forces had arrived within meters of the Manufiya Building.

Demonstrators primarily attempted to slow the advance of forces by throwing rocks and Molotov cocktails at security forces. Moaz Alaa, a first-year student at Cairo University, recounted one harrowing scene he witnessed in the morning:

As the bulldozer came to lift the fences, one person got on the bulldozer and threw a rock on its windshield. The bulldozer moved back and forth and picked him up. He definitely died.

Several demonstrators also told Human Rights Watch that that they observed or heard about a few armed protesters in the Manufiya Building in the later morning and early afternoon. One protester, who was throwing rocks at security forces from within the Manufiya Building, told Human Rights Watch that he saw one person with a handmade shotgun with birdshot and later one with a rifle and overhead someone say, “Don’t worry, we have weapons and are responding.” The Interior Ministry also has released video footage showing fire coming from the Manufiya Building at some point during the dispersal.

The Manufiya Building offered protesters strategic elevation from which to reach approaching forces with rocks and Molotov cocktails and walls and pillars to hide behind. Protesters also hurled projectiles from Tayaran Street itself and the gas station across the street. One demonstrator told Human Rights Watch that protesters on the front lines were supported by others who stayed behind and burned tires to lessen the effect of teargas, collected glass and gas for the Molotov cocktails, and broke rocks to pass up front. These efforts succeeded in preventing forces from entering the square for over six hours.

However, security forces quickly escalated their fire in order to break the stalemate. One journalist told Human Rights Watch that he heard the distinct sound of 14 mm cannon fire—eight or nine consecutive shots—from Tayaran Street around 10:30 a.m. Human Rights Watch could not independently verify use of this particular weapon. Several protesters recounted seeing snipers stationed on top of the Ministry of Defense Building on the opposite side of Tayaran Street open fire on protesters below. An electronics store owner said that many died during this period in the late morning:

There was lots of fire coming from officers on top of APCs and behind them. 40 or 50 people died around me…. One took a shot in his head, splitting it open. His brains fell on my foot.

Apart from a short de-escalation in firing around mid-day, the back-and-forth, on-and-off exchanges of gunfire on one side and rocks and Molotov cocktails on the other continued until around 3 p.m., when authorities significantly escalated fire. One protester described seeing an APC turn around a full 360 degrees, “firing arbitrarily in all directions.” A video reviewed by Human Rights Watch corroborates this description, showing an APC fire in this manner on southern Tayaran Street. Moaz Alaa of Cairo University described the scene on the first floor of the building at the time:

They started shooting randomly, hitting the brick wall (in front of us). I was in a state of serious fear, as bullets flew by. I took a bullet in my foot. One toe broke, the other was hanging on. I was in a state of terror and thought I would die. The bullets were not normal. I saw one person trying to run; he was trying to escape. He was shot in the back of his head. He fell suddenly and did not move…. Bullets were whizzing by; I even felt the air… They were using rifles and rapid-fire...guns for 20 minutes. They were not far. I could hear them. There were also snipers and others shooting from above.

At this time, Alaa told Human Rights Watch that his childhood friend, Mustafa Abd Raboh, who had been crouching next to him, put his head on his shoulder. Although he did not realize it at the time, Alaa said he later learned that Abd Raboh had been shot and killed as a result of the gunfire. One demonstrator said he observed snipers arbitrarily shooting from helicopters above Tayaran Street. A 19-year-old computer science student in the Manufiya Building described the shooting as “hysterical,” noting that the intensity of fire caused “chunks of concrete to fall on me.” One protester who similarly observed heavy fire that dislodged bricks from within the building said he saw 10 protesters fall in the span of five minutes in front of the Manufiya Building.

Supported by the heavy fire, forces made their final advance into Rab’a Square around 4 p.m. A 16-year-old high school student recounted to Human Rights Watch the efforts he and his close friend made to try to stop the advance:

I threw rocks and tried to stop [the bulldozer’s] advance. It entered and ran over bodies. Then I suddenly saw police officers run behind the bulldozers with guns. I was on the right of the bulldozer, [my friend] on the left. I was going to get hit, but someone pushed me out of the way. That saved my life. No-one was with [him]; he took a bullet in his back that came out of his chest and was martyred.

Another protester, who was on Sibawayh al-Masry Street perpendicular to Tayaran Street, described how he got injured around the same time:

I saw Dr. Ahmed Fattah, a dentist, walking slowly and peacefully towards me, as I was 10 meters away. He got hit by a bullet in his leg. The blood splattered…. There was fire everywhere. We all prayed and tried to pull him back, but couldn’t. Fire then got lighter, and I wanted to go. I got the courage and went. I pulled him back two meters and then saw blood on my arm and realized something was not right. I jumped back and saw that the bullet had struck me. I think they were aiming for my chest, but because I was dragging him, I moved and it hit my arm.

By 4:30-5 p.m., security forces had entered Rab’a Square and the Rab’a hospital from Tayaran Street. Unlike at other entrances, though, their assault on the southern side of Tayaran Street continued, as Egyptian police entered the Manufiya Building on foot around 5 p.m. Over the course of the next four hours, they proceeded to beat, torture, and, in some cases, execute the demonstrators there, according to three witnesses.

Terrified at the thought of confronting the forces that had been firing into the sit-in all day, one protester, who had gone to the ninth floor of the building to deliver food and drinks to protesters there, described to Human Rights Watch what happened as he tried to escape the building.

I looked for an exit, but couldn’t find one. I went down the stairs to the seventh floor and then went down from there by scaffold. On the second floor, an officer there told me to come down. I came down, and he said to lie on my stomach. I lay on my back, took off my hat, and he put a gun on me and called me a coward and kicked me. I was all by myself. He then said to get up and go to another officer on the same floor. I went to him, and he hit me with the bottom of his rifle. The ground floor was all bodies, tens and tens of them.

A computer science student described the entry of security forces into the Manufiya building:

They entered the building, and killed five around me...I was not sure what to do. I had nowhere to go. I was next; my time had come. They entered the room and told us we would die. They called me and said to leave the building. An officer entered and said ‘Don’t worry!’ I put my hands down, and then he beat me. They called us dogs and other names. Each hit us a different way. I was on the first floor and didn’t know what to do. The officer said if you don’t run, we will kill you, but one ran away and I found him on the floor dead. The officer spit on the policeman who fired, saying, “Why didn’t you shoot him in the eye?” There were many corpses on the ground. I left.

Moaz Alaa, who had been shot in the foot and lost his friend Mustafa Abd Raboh during the intense afternoon assault, was not as fortunate. He told Human Rights Watch that, as security forces entered, “They shot everyone who moved,” including people running from floor to floor. He said officers checked to see if people were alive by “hitting them on the head with the barrel of their guns,” and “stepping on wounds.” He said they piled the dead bodies up like “pyramids.” He recounted what transpired when officers got to him:

[The officer] kicked me and stepped on my head with his big boots. My face was all bloodied, but we were silent. Whoever spoke died. He jumped on my head and body. He stepped hard on my injured foot, and I stopped feeling it. They did the same things to others, as I saw. We were like this for an hour…. Next to me, there was an injured person: a 50-year-old with his guts out, as a result of gunfire. The soldier did the same thing to him that he did to me until he died. He hit him in the area of his injury, kicked him there.

The torture and killings continued for several hours, according to Alaa, during which time all he could hear were the screams of injured protesters being tortured and killed. A protester, who left the central part of the square when security forces took over around 5:30-6 p.m., said he recalled “hearing people in [the] Manufiya [Building] calling out.” He described seeing a protester, who was around 25 years old and wearing a gas mask, “get shot and fall as he was moving to the stairs to exit.” Another young protester also told Human Rights Watch that he witnessed beatings and torture within the Manuyfia Building after police took control of it in the late afternoon.

A short while later, the officer returned again to Alaa:

He hit me so hard that I lost consciousness. Two officers were hitting me at once and swearing. I have had to grow out my hair, because of the scars on my head. They were kicking me and one kept hitting me with a gun until I lost consciousness again. He told me, ‘Did you think you are going to heaven? You aren’t. It’s in our hands to kill, in our hands to put you in heaven or hell. We’ll put you in hell.”

Shortly thereafter, the officer turned to the man sitting a few meters away, Alaa said:

The man told [the officer] that he had diabetes and would die if he didn’t take a shot in his waist. The officer took out the shot and broke it. The man was on my left, two people over. There was liquid in his mouth. Salman, the guy next to me, said ‘the guy next to me is dying, give him water!’ They hit Salman, and the other soldier brought water and spilled it on [the diabetic man’s] face and said drink. Drops were going down, and he was trying to grab whatever he could. His face was all bloody and dirty though.

Alaa was only able to leave the Manufiya Building at around 8:30 p.m., several hours after security forces had fully taken over the square, when an ambulance came and insisted on transporting the injured to local hospitals. The Manufiya Building was the last part of Rab’a Square to be taken by the security forces.

Central Rab’a Square (Rab’a Hospital, Mosque, & Surrounding Structures)

The Rab’a sit-in centered around the square at the intersection of Nasr and Tayaran Streets in front of the Rab’a al-Adawiya Mosque. Brotherhood organizers had set-up a stage, from which hung a large photograph of Morsy, in front of the mosque. Immediately behind the mosque is the Rab’a hospital, a multi-story government medical facility that provides regular outpatient services, though has only basic facilities. Three separate small buildings, to which demonstrators had access during the sit-in, stand adjacent to the mosque:

The field hospital, which lies on northern side of Nasr Street near the Traffic Directorate building and which protesters had converted from a rental hall into a field hospital in the early days of the sit-in;

The field hospital, which lies on northern side of Nasr Street near the Traffic Directorate building and which protesters had converted from a rental hall into a field hospital in the early days of the sit-in; The media center, which had been a central coordinating point for journalists during the sit-in; and,

Hall 3, which was reserved for senior Brotherhood leaders.

On the day of the dispersal, protesters brought injured and dead protesters into the three halls, Rab’a mosque, and the Rab’a hospital, which did not open to the public on the day of the dispersal in light of the violence that began in the early morning. Volunteer doctors and other professionals, many themselves demonstrators, tended to the injured using only basic donated equipment.

When the dispersal began shortly after 6 a.m., firing largely focused on the peripheries of the square. Until about 9:30 a.m., the center of the square remained largely free from heavy teargas and gunfire. Very few of the demonstrators Human Rights Watch interviewed who had been in the center of the square said they heard the warnings security forces had played at some of the square’s entrances in the morning. Most demonstrators in the square awoke either to warnings from speakers on the stage that the dispersal had commenced or to the sound of teargas and gunfire on the peripheries.

However, the quick resort to force led to serious injuries and casualties from the first minutes of the dispersal. While Brotherhood organizers had organized to have doctors and small makeshift medical facilities at the entrances to the square, the amount of force overwhelmed demonstrators, who almost immediately began transferring the injured and dead by gurney, motorcycle, and via other means to the center of the square. Initially, most were put in the field hospital and media center.

Two doctors interviewed separately who were volunteering at the field hospital told Human Rights Watch on the day of the dispersal that they received their first injuries from live ammunition around 6:30 a.m. A medical volunteer, who called Human Rights Watch at 7:10 a.m. saying that there were already people with bullet wounds in the field hospital, later told Human Rights Watch in an interview:

We made it to the front of the field hospital at around 7 a.m. There were already a lot of wounded there. I saw people with birdshot and bullet wounds. The shooting was extremely intense, and people couldn’t breathe from the gas. I really couldn’t tell you how many people had gunshot wounds at that point. Another wounded person was brought in every minute.

Another doctor at the field hospital told Human Rights Watch that by 7 a.m., 26 protesters had already been brought to the field hospital dead or died of their wounds there.

With few doctors, limited supplies, and almost no equipment, medical personnel were not able to do much more than stabilize wounds. One volunteer doctor in the field hospital told Human Rights Watch that, by the mid-morning, he felt that there was “no role for us as doctors,” as all they could do by then was “just wrap wounds.” Another volunteer described the scene in the hospital as “terrifying,” with “screams everywhere and oceans of blood on the ground.”

A demonstrator whom Human Rights Watch interviewed at a Cairo hospital the day after the dispersal depicted what he saw when he arrived at the field hospital with a wounded friend at around 8:30 a.m.:

There were bodies everywhere. There were so many bodies, and no way to treat them. There were men lying unable to move, many with internal bleeding, and nothing to do for them. We could barely walk among them. They couldn’t do anything for [my friend] either; they were just overwhelmed.

The situation in the field hospital was exacerbated by the difficulty in transporting and evacuating the wounded. Protesters and independent observers consistently told Human Rights Watch that once the dispersal started, the intense gunfire made it very dangerous to move around or to leave the square. One Egyptian journalist compared the situation to a “mousetrap,” explaining that you just “couldn’t get out.”

One journalist who had spent the previous three days at the sit-in told Human Rights Watch that he wanted to leave the sit-in around 1 p.m., but that police had blocked all the roads out, and that snipers on rooftops were firing on people in the streets, making it dangerous to try to leave. He eventually managed to leave around 3:30 p.m. after having searched for a safe exit for more than two hours without success. The mother of one 15-year-old boy told Human Rights Watch that her son had called her from the sit-in when the dispersal started, saying that he wanted to leave but could not because there was shooting where the army had announced safe exits. The boy ended up sustaining a head-wound, apparently from rubber bullets, doctors had told the mother.

One protester told Human Rights that, while there were ambulances at the entrances to the square, they were virtually unable to move during the day:

The medical staff needed to take the injured from the field hospital to other hospitals because it was too crowded. But the police weren’t allowing the ambulances to get through, and some of the ambulance drivers were injured and killed just like us. I saw them in the hospital injured with bullet wounds. I recognized that they were ambulance drivers because of their uniforms. This was still early in the morning… There was no safe exit during the attack. There are four main entrances to Rab’a Square. From the beginning, the police was attacking from all sides. Soldiers blocked even the side streets, so no one could leave.

Photojournalist Mosaab al-Shamy also observed ambulance drivers who had been injured and killed at the field hospital:

That’s where I took the picture of the ambulance worker who had been killed. Four other ambulance workers were with him at the time. The whole time I was there, I didn’t see a single ambulance able to access the area and reach the wounded.

By around 8:30-9 a.m., security forces had arrived near the Traffic Directorate building on Nasr Street and teargas, birdshot, and live fire began to reach the field hospital, just meters away. Doctors instructed volunteers and the injured to move away from windows, as pellets and bullets came through. A volunteer pharmacy student, who helped doctors on the day of the dispersal, told Human Rights Watch:

At 8:30 a.m., teargas came to us, and doctors were trying to cope. We couldn’t treat ourselves, much less others. We gave our masks to women, but we had difficulty. Gas spread, and people were choking. We said we cannot treat people with the gas everywhere; we would work until we couldn’t handle it and then leave. At 9 a.m., birdshot arrived through the windows from the direction of Tiba Mall. I was struck by a pellet in my head, then took one in my back.

Around the same time, the center of the square had begun to come under fire. Teargas had begun to seep into the square by 8 a.m., but, by 9:30-10 a.m., security forces fired teargas directly at the center of the sit-in, four witnesses said. Two of those witnesses — a mother who was with her 16-year-old daughter and a 29-year-old realtor — separately saw teargas fired from helicopters hovering above the square.

Six witnesses told Human Rights Watch that, a short while later, snipers in a helicopter fired at a cameramen and his aide, who had been filming the speeches on the stage, injuring them both. An engineering student at al-Azhar University and a member of organizing team for the stage told Human Rights Watch:

I was standing in front of the stage, three or four meters away, moving back and forth. The helicopter was above and the camera directly in front of me. The helicopter descended, and the sniper shot the videographer manning the main camera on stage. He was injured, not killed. I saw him falling… His aide was also injured and was taken away from the stage.”

By 10 a.m., the situation in the field hospital became untenable, and doctors ordered patients transferred to the Rab’a mosque, media center, Hall 3, and the Rab’a hospital. Volunteer doctors and demonstrators described similar scenes of carnage and devastation in in each location, each of which had already been receiving dead and injured protesters.

For most of the day, the Rab’a mosque served as a refuge for those looking to escape the violence, particularly women and children. By mid-morning though, a section had been turned into a hospital and morgue. One protester, whose fiancé was killed during the dispersal, told Human Rights Watch that, by 9:30 a.m., the mosque held so many corpses that it felt like it “had turned into a cemetery.” As violence intensified, more people packed into the mosque. Without fans and with windows closed—an attempt to keep gunfire and teargas out—the situation becoming harder and harder to bear, one protester who had gone inside looking for a family member told Human Rights Watch.

The media center was “full of bodies, lined up side-by-side,” Asma Shehata, an activist in Rab’a who had been documenting the killings, told Human Rights Watch. A protester described the scene in the media center by the afternoon as a “massacre,” with many corpses, not enough room for the many injured, and the smell of a butcher’s shop.

Hall 3, the last facility to be turned into a makeshift hospital and morgue in the late morning, also quickly filled up. A medical student who treated patients in the hall from 1:30 to 6:30 p.m. told Human Rights Watch that he received a “continuous stream of martyrs” throughout the afternoon. He felt, by the evening, their “medical ability had stopped,” as they were “not able to do anything” with “all in need of intensive care.”

Beginning in the late morning though, Rab’a hospital became the primary destination for injured protesters. Human Rights Watch visited the hospital at 3:30 p.m. and saw many volunteers carrying people with gunshot wounds into the hospital. Doctors were operating on men in the passageways, and the hospital was overflowing with injured lying on the ground.

One volunteer described what the hospital looked like when she arrived in the afternoon:

I got to the hospital’s first floor, which was covered in blood. Most wounds appeared to be to the legs, chest, and head. The ground was the reception, triage area. The elevator was not working properly. Wounded persons were just left there, brought in by relatives. It was very crowded and doctors very confused…. The simplest supplies were lacking… [Patients] were screaming for doctors…. Elevators were filled with wounded; people just put them in and pushed the buttons.

One doctor said that about half of the injuries he received were in the head, many to the top of the head, indicating that they had been hit from above. Another doctor told Human Rights Watch that the two hours she spent treating patients in the hospital were “the longest two hours of my life,” and shared details about a few of the patients she treated:

A 70-year-old woman, Fadila, had taken a bullet in her head. One 18-year-old boy came in, saying his stomach hurt. I looked down and his intestines were all out. He had taken seven bullets and [later] died. Another took a bullet in the face, causing his face to open and tongue to fall out. He didn’t know though. He spent 40 minutes looking at me and gesturing for help, but I couldn’t do anything. Surgery was not possible.

Dr. Mohamed Abdelaziz, working at the hospital, told Human Rights Watch on August 14 that all but one person he had seen had been killed by live ammunition, with shots to the head and chest, and that the one man had been burnt to death in his tent. Another doctor said, of the 32 dead protesters he tended to, 30 had been killed by live fire to the head and chest, while another two were killed in an explosion. Video footage of nine bodies carried into the hospital show that two appeared to have been shot in the chest, five in the back of the head, and two in the face.

The hospital lacked proper equipment for surgical operations. Continual sniper fire in front of the main hospital entrance, on the west side of Anwar al-Mufti Street, made entry and exit out of the hospital—the only way to evacuate wounded out of the square—extremely dangerous.

Fire from snipers onto the hospital entrance began from the early morning, witnesses said. A 19-year-old demonstrator said that he dodged “arbitrary, random” fire coming from the adjacent Traffic Directorate building around 7:15 a.m. when he went to wash for prayer in bathrooms located in a garage in front of the hospital. He hid behind cars, while two guys near him went ahead to the bathrooms. He looked over and noticed that only one remained standing, as “the other had fallen and his brains were out.”

A resident of Nasr City told Human Rights Watch about the sniper fire he encountered around 10:30 a.m. as he sought to evacuate a group of young women from the square in the midst of the fire:

I ran fast [out of the hospital] as bullets were flying. A guy stood in front of me to shield me from a bullet and fell on the sidewalk. I fell too and felt fire in my leg. I looked at him, and his face was not there. Blood was coming out of his neck. He saved my life… I only took a birdshot pellet in my leg. It turned out that I knew him personally; I couldn’t recognize him at the time because of his injuries, but later discovered that he is somehow still alive.

For the entirety of the day—at least ten hours—snipers on top of the Traffic Directorate building continued to fire at those who entered or exited the hospital, many witnesses said, meaning that anyone who wanted to leave had to brave almost constant sniper fire coming from the east. One foreign correspondent who covered the events of that day told Human Rights Watch that she was unable to reach the hospital around 2:30 p.m. because of sniper fire. As she tried to reach the hospital, she saw one man getting shot while he was helping carry a wounded protester to a nearby ambulance. Another man, who was initially sitting up on his elbows on a stretcher being carried to the ambulances, was also shot and died before he reached the ambulance, she said.

By the late afternoon, additional fire came from advancing security forces. At around 3 p.m., a Human Rights Watch researcher witnessed the shooting of a man not displaying any weapons or using or threatening any violence as he left the Rab’a hospital and headed across the road. The fire came from the direction of security forces, towards the sit-in. He fell to the ground, blood seeping out of his head, but was able to crawl to safety.

The constant fire at times made ambulance workers unable to access those critically wounded in the hospital. At times, demonstrators would brave the gunfire and run across the road carrying a wounded person on a stretcher to ambulances waiting outside, but many people did not have this option or any safe way of getting medical help. Video footage shows a man being shot in the center of the square as he carries a blood-stained lifeless body. One medical professional who volunteered at the Rab’a hospital told Human Rights Watch that most of those who died under his watch did so as a result of bleeding and hemorrhages, in large part due to the inability to receive timely medical attention.

Mohamed Tareq, injured at 7:30 a.m. by three live bullets to his torso and arm on Tayaran Street, said he was one of hundreds of demonstrators unable to receive necessary medical attention for hours. Tareq said he spent several hours at the field hospital—including 30 minutes waiting for medical attention as doctors struggled to deal with the influx of injured protests after the dispersal began—but all medical staff could do was wrap his injury. Transferred to the Rab’a hospital at 10 a.m., doctors told him that they could not perform the surgery he needed and that he needed outside treatment, he said. He told Human Rights Watch that he did not leave the hospital until 9 p.m. After several hospitals rejected him and with hospitals overflowing with injured and dead protesters, he said he only managed to have a surgery performed at 11 p.m. the following day. Seven protesters told Human Rights Watch that hospitals in the Nasr City area rejected injured or dead protesters coming from Rab’a Square, including the al-Mokawleen al-Arab, Taa’min al-Saahi, Hassabo International, Dar al-Hikma, and Mounira hospitals.

As security forces inched forward in the early afternoon, fire intensified throughout the center of Rab’a Square. Fire from snipers, in particular ones located in the Ministry of Defense building opposite the stage at the beginning of Tayaran Street, became more constant, according to dozens of witnesses interviewed by Human Rights Watch.

One protester recounted the shooting of a friend, which he witnessed in the early afternoon:

Abdullah [our friend] had taken a bullet in his stomach at 1:30 p.m., and Khallad [his brother-in-law] came [to Rab’a Square] to take him to an [outside] hospital at 2 p.m. He entered through a side street and went to the field hospital. We were standing with Abdelhamid [another friend] in a small makeshift field hospital by the stage because the other hospital couldn’t take any new people. Khallad took a bullet in his head while standing and died right away. He was on the fence by the hospital, near the mosque. Abdullah died one week later.

At roughly the same time, near the center of Rab’a Square, another demonstrator recounted a similarly harrowing encounter by a sniper in a helicopter:

I then saw a helicopter and a sniper shooting out of it. I froze and stopped... then suddenly a guy in his 20s fell. Then, [another man] took a bullet from the sniper…he is now a paraplegic. Then a third person was shot in the head, and I fell on him…. It was not 20 meters away.

By 1 p.m., the stage was under constant fire, one Egyptian journalist told Human Rights Watch. Video footage clearly shows unarmed men crouching near the remains of the main stage in Rab’a to hide from incessant gunfire. The footage shows two of them being shot and apparently killed, and a third shot in the leg.

In response, Brotherhood organizers built a wooden enclosure to protect those still using the stage to rally the protesters. As the afternoon progressed, though, this proved to be insufficient protection and speakers abandoned the stage. Protest organizers resorted instead to having speakers speak off-stage and to recordings, one organizer told Human Rights Watch. By around 4-4:30 p.m., bulldozers and APCs arrived and occupied the stage area, continuing to destroy all in their path, and demonstrators retreated inside the courtyard of the mosque, hiding between the mosque, adjacent halls, and hospital.

Meanwhile, some medical volunteers had remained in the field hospital after many evacuated it in the late morning and continued to receive injured protesters and corpses throughout the afternoon. As security forces broke through on the heels of intense fire on Nasr Street, though, the field hospital came under intense fire, as one demonstrator told Human Rights Watch:

I heard a lot of firing then from both sides—from Anwar al-Mufti [Street], behind us, and from Nasr Street in front. It sounded like the bullets were flying right over our heads. In the field hospital, they [the doctors] told us, ‘Exit from the passageway; they’re surrounding us’. There was so much firing. Someone said, ‘We’re surrounded; we have to get out’. There were so many people in the field hospital then. We tried to hide and stay there. A friend of mine, named Hazem, was injured by a bullet in his back. He was paralyzed. We had to try to get all of the injured people from the hospital to the Rab’a hospital. But we couldn’t carry the bodies. We had to leave them there. There was shooting between the field hospital and Rab’a hospital, and it was too difficult to carry the injured. My friends were shot at when they were trying to carry Hazem, so they had to put him down and wait for someone else to come and help.



Another protester told Human Rights Watch that she remained in the field hospital until 5:40 p.m., at which point security forces surrounding the building told her to leave, as they intended to burn the building. Fifteen minutes later, the field hospital was on fire, and she had to leave by jumping out the window, she said. One other demonstrator, who had fallen asleep upstairs in the field hospital while the structure began to burn, began immediately to move corpses, some of which had begun to burn, to the courtyard between the Rab’a mosque and media center.

At around 4:30 p.m., the assault reached the very center of Rab’a Square, with gunfire reaching the mosque, courtyard, and adjacent halls. An education student at Cairo University said that police began targeting the hospital with teargas and live ammunition after 4 p.m. She recounted the horrific scene—the ground a “sea of blood” and “full of people”—and her looking upon badly injured protesters, knowing that “I was not able to do anything besides watch them die.” A medical volunteer told Human Rights Watch that teargas hit the courtyard between the mosque and halls, where he had been treating injured protesters, at around 4:30 p.m. A heavily crowded area, he said “people did not know what to do [and] could not control their breathing and were choking.”

At around the same time, the courtyard adjacent to the mosque came under direct gunfire. One protester, who entered the courtyard area around 4:30 p.m., told Human Rights Watch that the man standing next to him “was hit by sniper [fire] and fell.” With “bullets coming from all sides,” he said he “was waiting for my moment for the same to happen.” One 17-year-old saw a small child take a bullet in his arm. As security forces entered at around 5:30-6 p.m., another protester said that many demonstrators had “given up and were writing their name and ID numbers on themselves,” so they could be identified once they were killed. He called his parents to say goodbye.

Security forces, who had been constantly firing at the entrance to Rab’a hospital all day, began taking direct aim at the building itself at around 4 p.m., witnesses said. One doctor described the situation to Human Rights Watch:

There was lots of automatic gunfire. An explosion outside destroyed the glass door to the hospital. At times the shooting was so heavy that we had to lie on the floor. The walls protected us, but it was dangerous to be close to a window. I thought that they would kill us all.

Human Rights Watch visited the Rab’a hospital at 3:30 p.m. during the dispersal on August 14. Upon entering, one volunteer doctor told Human Rights Watch staff to stay away from the passageway next to the stairwell because security forces were shooting bullets through the building. A protester in the building confirmed seeing that happen.

Security forces also attacked the Rab’a hospital with teargas, which reached one protester all the way on the top floor, where she had been sleeping, the volunteer told Human Rights Watch. A doctor in the hospital said that the teargas seriously affected injured patients, causing many to suffocate and some to die.

After police broke through past the Manufiya Building on southern Tayaran Street, they headed to Rab’a hospital, led by APCs. At the time, Anas and Ammar al-Beltagy, sons of prominent Brotherhood figure Mohamed al-Beltagy, had just exited Rab’a hospital in an effort to leave the square and take the corpse of their 17-year-old sister Asma, who had been killed earlier in the dispersal, to a nearby hospital, two witnesses told Human Rights Watch. As they left, APCs began firing in the direction of the hospital, forcing them to drop Asma Beltagy’s body and seek protection.

Egyptian journalist Asma al-Khatib described the scene inside the hospital as the APCs approached:

I saw three APCs in front of the hospital, from which police were firing. I was right there behind the [reception] desk and saw them hitting hard. I hid under the desk for protection. The fire continued for 15 minutes. Those who couldn’t hide got injured standing. The bullets entered next to me and broke the glass. It was a terrifying moment. I thought death was near. I charged my phone and, with bullets flying by me, thought it was done and that I would die. I took out my phone and called my mom.

A hospital volunteer caught in the same hail of gunfire told Human Rights Watch that she sustained a bullet wound to her side during this time. A father of three who had carried an injured demonstrator into the hospital on his back described bullets “whizzing past my head,” which caused him to fall with the injured man.

Around 4:45 p.m., Special Forces (ESF), dressed in black, entered the hospital and immediately ordered everyone, including doctors, out of the hospital, witnesses said. They issued instructions not to carry any injured with them; according to one protester they said, “Whoever carries a corpse will lie next to him.” Two others were told, “Leave now or you’ll end up like them.”

One doctor recounted his experience as the forces entered the hospital:

He [the officer] came in and started shouting, “Everyone out!” He was holding an automatic machine gun. I was with a man in his fifties lying down with a gunshot wound in his chest. My wife checked his pulse, and he had a heart rate. Another doctor intubated him, and I was holding the bag. He was on the floor. His leg was on one body, and his head was on top of another body. My back was to the door. No one knew what to do, and no one wanted to leave… my wife, another doctor and I started shouting, “Take the injured!” He [the officer] kept saying, “Don’t take anyone out.”

The doctor said he and his wife then attempted to exit with the three injured men on their floor:

I moved deeper into the room. The biggest one [with a leg injury] needed help. The wheelchair was broken, so I put him in a regular chair, and my wife and I tried to pull… I took the guy and put him on my shoulder.... My wife did the same. The officer said, “Leave him alone!” My wife stepped in front of us and started to say, “We need to take him out! Didn’t you kill enough already?” I looked at him and gave him a look to say, “Let us go.” He punched me in the chest, and both of us [the speaker and the injured man] fell. The injured man said, “Just leave me.” The officer started to hold his gun. He put his knuckles into my chest, dug them in and said, “Take her and leave.” I grabbed my wife’s hand and we left without saying anything.

One demonstrator estimated that, when he left around 5:30 p.m., 10-15 injured people per hospital room remained.

A few volunteers insisted on staying amidst the threats and violence. One doctor recounted that, when she refused to leave, security forces proceeded to execute the three patients she had been treating:

The Special Forces in black spread out and went around. They came to me, and I said, “I have injured with me.” One officer said, “I am ordering you to leave.” I said, “I can’t leave with injured here; take them out yourselves!” He didn’t respond; instead, he took out his pistol and killed the three injured men in front o