Anarchy in Egypt: Dutch reporter is 'raped in Tahrir Square' as MILLIONS take to the streets demanding president's resignation

The demonstrations were largest since the 2011 Arab Spring uprising



Chanted: 'The people demand the fall of the regime'

At least 43 women, including foreign journalist, suffered sexual assaults



U.S. and UK have urged citizens to cancel travel plans to or within Egypt

Egyptian media: Woman was raped five days ago and is now recovering



By Jill Reilly

|

A Dutch journalist has been raped by several men in Cairo's Tahrir Square as millions of protestors took to the streets to demand President Mohammed Morsi to step down.

The news of the attack came as the Egyptian army issued a 48-hour deadline for the deadly clashes to be resolved - so far eight people have been killed and hundreds injured.



The woman was allegedly raped 'by men who dub themselves revolutionists,' according to Egypt 25’s reporter Dina Zakaria.



The horrifying rape is reminiscent of the violence at Tahrir Square in 2011 when CBS foreign correspondent Lara Logan was beaten and sexually assaulted by a 200-strong mob.

According to Ynetnews , the state hospital issued a statement saying the women was admitted after being raped by five men several days ago.



Scroll down for video



Colourful: A general view shows fireworks above Tahrir Square as Egyptians celebrate the Egyptian military reaction to the protests against President Morsi in Cairo

Fireworks: The army gave Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi and the opposition a 48-hour ultimatum to reach consensus and meet the people's demands or it would announce measures to end the stalemate

From above: Protesters take part in a protest demanding that Egyptian President Mohamed Mursi resign at Tahrir Square in Cairo

Huge numbers: Egypt's powerful armed forces gave Islamist President Mohamed Mursi a virtual ultimatum to share power, urging the nation's feuding politicians to agree on an inclusive roadmap for the country's future within 48 hours

Making a point: Egyptians supporting President Morsi wave their national flag and shout slogans during a protest in Cairo The website reported the journalist underwent surgery and has been released.

This morning women's activists said at least 43 females, including a foreign journalist, suffered organised sexual assaults by gangs of men in recent days.

More... Return of the revolution? Egypt's Tahrir Square is packed to capacity again as thousands protest against hated president

Smiling sisters shot dead for dancing in the rain: Pakistani girls, 15 and 16, killed along with their mother for making video which 'stained the family honour' Egypt's military has given its president and his opponents a 48 hour 'last chance' to reach an agreement to 'meet the people's demands' before it intervenes in the dispute. Hundreds of thousands of protesters massed for a second day today calling on President Mohammed Morsi to step down.

Egypt's military described the mass protests yesterday that brought out millions demanding Morsi's removal as 'glorious', and said protesters expressed their opinion 'in peaceful and civilized manner,' and that 'it is necessary that the people get a reply ... to their calls.'

Revolt: Protesters have stormed the headquarters of President Mohammed Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt

Opportunists: Egyptian men loot the burnt headquarters after it was set ablaze by opposition demonstrators overnight

Ultimatum: Egypt's opposition gave Islamist Mohamed Morsi a day to quit or face civil disobedience after deadly protests demanded the country's first democratically elected president step down after just a year in office The military underlined it will 'not be a party in politics or rule.' But it said it has a responsibility to act because Egypt's national security is facing a 'grave danger,' according to a statement read out on state television.

'The Armed Forces repeat its call for the people's demands to be met and give everyone 48 hours as a last chance to shoulder the burden of a historic moment for a nation that will not forgive or tolerate any party that is lax in shouldering its responsibility,' it said.

It did not directly define 'the people's demands,' but said if they are not realized, the military is obliged to 'announce a road-map for the future and the steps for overseeing its implementation, with participation of all patriotic and sincere parties and movements'

It is the second ultimatum to be given to Mr Morsi and the opposition to reach an agreement. Last Sunday, defence minister Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi gave the two sides a week to reach an agreement.

The organizers of yesteday's protests also gave Mr Morsi a Tuesday 5pm deadline to step down or face an escalation of the campaign to force him out, including civil disobedience.

Hours earlier protesters stormed the headquarters of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.

Past: The horrifying rape is reminiscent of the violence at Tahrir Square in 2011 when CBS foreign correspondent Lara Logan was beaten and sexually assaulted by a 200-strong mob



The six-storey Cairo building was set alight overnight, and this morning looters ransacked its contents and removed the Brotherhood's sign - it is thought eight people have been killed outside in the last 24 hours.



Egyptian security forces arrested 15 armed bodyguards of the number two in the ruling Muslim Brotherhood, Khairat El-Shater, on Monday after an exchange of fire, security sources said.

And the headquarters of the moderate Egyptian Islamist party Wasat was set on fire today, in an expansion of attacks on Islamist organisations across the country. Unidentified assailants threw petrol bombs at the building.

It followed overnight clashes between armed Morsi supporters barricaded inside the building and young protesters pelting it with firebombs and rocks.

The unrest has led the U.S. State Department and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office have urged citizens to cancel travel plans to or within Egypt.

Volatile: More than 600 people have been wounded after millions of protesters swarmed into the streets to demand the resignation of Islamist President Mohamed Morsi

Advice: The unrest has led the U.S. State Department and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office have urged citizens to cancel travel plans to or within Egypt

Protests: Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi wave national flags and light fireworks during a protest outside the presidential palace, in Cairo

Determined: Egyptians flooded the streets determined to oust Islamist President Mohamed Morsi on the anniversary of his turbulent first year in power



An Egyptian opposition movement that has led nationwide protests against President Morsi has given him until tomorrow to resign.

Young revolutionaries united with liberal and leftist opposition parties in a massive show of defiance on the first anniversary of Morsi's inauguration yesterday, chanting 'the people demand the fall of the regime'. The demonstrations, which brought half a million people to Cairo's central Tahrir Square and a similar crowd in the second city, Alexandria, were easily the largest since the Arab Spring uprising that ousted Hosni Mubarak in 2011. After dawn today, young men were still preventing traffic entering Tahrir Square but only hundreds of people remained, some resting under makeshift awnings. Morsi, the most populous Arab state's first freely elected leader, stayed out of sight throughout the protests but acknowledged through a spokesman that he had made mistakes while adding that he was working to fix them and was open to dialogue. He showed no sign of quitting. Anger: Protesters opposing Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi wave Egyptian flag and shout slogans against him and members of the Muslim Brotherhood after attacking the national headquarters of the Muslim Brotherhood Fire attack: A protester throws Molotov cocktails at the national headquarters of the Muslim Brotherhood Fireworks explode over Tahrir Square as the sun sets during protests this evening As nightfall came to Cairo, opponents of Egypt's President Mohammed Morsi protest were still gathered in their thousands outside the presidential palace

Demonstrations: Opponents of Egypt's Islamist President Mohammed Morsi chant slogans

Demands: Egyptians poured onto the streets on Sunday, swelling crowds that opposition leaders hope will number into the millions by evening and persuade Islamist President Mohamed Morsi to resign

TENSION RISING: TRAVEL ADVICE

The U.S. State Department and UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office have urged citizens to cancel travel plans to or within Egypt.

The FCO advise against all travel to parts of the country - around one million British nationals visit Egypt every year. The demonstrations are 'likely to continue in the near future,' the U.S. travel warning said.

The U.S has also evacuated various 'non-emergency employees and family members' from the country.

Similar warnings have followed from Canada.

Since February the Netherlands has been advising its citizens to 'consider taking the initiative to leave the country.'

France, Germany and New Zealand continue to urge travelers to Egypt to avoid large crowds and be on alert.



An aide to Morsi said he was 'encouraged' that events had unfolded mostly peacefully: 'This is another day of democratic practice that we all cherish,' he said in a statement.

He accused the opposition of being vague in its demands and outlined three ways forward: first, parliamentary elections, which he called 'the most obvious'; second, national dialogue, which he said opponents had repeatedly rejected; and third, early presidential elections, as demanded by protesters.

But that, he said, 'simply destroys our democracy'.

The massive protests showed that the ruling Muslim Brotherhood has not only alienated liberals and secularists by seeking to entrench Islamic rule but has also angered millions of ordinary Egyptians with economic mismanagement.

Tourism and investment have dried up, inflation is rampant and fuel supplies are running short, with power cuts lengthening in the summer heat.

Dozens of militants attacked the Brotherhood's national headquarters in Cairo with shotguns, petrol bombs and rocks, setting it on fire, and targeted offices of its political party across the country.

VIDEO: Muslim Brotherhood HQ is overrun and ransacked



Mass crowd: Protesters opposing Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi gather during a demonstration at Tahrir Square in Cairo

Nickname: An Egyptian protester holds a tire framing a poster of Islamist President Mohammed Morsi, a reference to his nickname by protesters as a 'spare tire' because he was the spare presidential candidate for Muslim brotherhood

Bitter: Anti-Morsi protesters chant slogans on a pedestrian bridge with a banner that reads "Get Out", during a massive protest in Alexandria

There was no sign of police or fire service protection for the Brotherhood's head office, where witnesses said guards inside the building fired on the attackers. Two people died and 11 were injured in that clash, hospital sources said.

Protest organisers called on Egyptians to keep occupying central squares across the country in a campaign of peaceful civil disobedience until Mursi quits.

Tens of thousands of demonstrators stayed in Tahrir Square long after midnight, appearing to heed the call for a sit-in. But as the working day began, only hundreds remained.

VIDEO:Thousands fill Tahrir Square in Egypt to protest against Morsi



If protesters maintain their camps, however, and return in the evenings, the spotlight will be on the army. It displayed its neutrality on Sunday, making goodwill gestures to the protesters after urging feuding politicians last week to cooperate to solve the nation's problems.

Some uniformed policemen marched among protesters in Cairo and Alexandria, chanting 'the police and the people are one', and several senior officers addressed the Tahrir Square crowd.

That cast doubt on whether Morsi could rely on the security forces to clear the streets if he gave the order.

Diplomats said the army, which ruled uneasily during the transition from Mubarak's fall to Morsi's election, had signalled it was deeply reluctant to step in again, unless violence got out of hand and national security was at stake.

While the main demonstrations were peaceful and festive in atmosphere, seven people were shot dead in clashes in the central cities of Assiut, Beni Suef and Fayoum and outside the Brotherhood's Cairo headquarters.



One protestor holds a toy sheep as a sign. Now mass demonstrations across Egypt could determine its future

Egyptians opposing President Morsi shout as they take part in a protest demanding him to leave office, in front of the presidential palace in in Cairo

One woman has painted a flag on her cheek and shouts during the historical protest in Cairo

Protesters opposing Mohamed Morsi carry a huge flag as they march to Tahrir square from Mustafa Mahmoud mosque

Tensions between Morsi's supporters and his opponents have risen in the lead-up to the anniversary, with at least seven killed in clashes last week

The Health Ministry said 613 people were wounded in street fighting around the country.

The opposition National Salvation Front coalition of liberal, secular and left-wing parties declared victory, saying the masses had 'confirmed the downfall of the regime of Mohamed Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood'.

Opposition leaders, who have seen previous protest waves fizzle after a few days in December and January, were to meet on Monday afternoon to plot their next move.

Influential Qatar-based Muslim cleric Sheikh Youssef Qaradawi, visiting Cairo, appealed to fellow Egyptians to show more patience with Morsi, while saying the president had made errors.

'How long has Mohamed Morsi ruled? One year,' Qaradawi said in a television address. 'Is one year enough to solve the problems of 60 years? That's impossible ... We must give the man a chance and help him. Everyone must cooperate.'

The United States and the European Union have urged Morsi to share power with the opposition, saying only a national consensus can help Egypt overcome a severe economic crisis and build democratic institutions.

Morsi and his Brotherhood supporters have so far rebuffed such pressure, arguing that he has democratic legitimacy and the opposition is merely seeking to achieve on the streets what it failed to secure at the ballot box.

