Far north Queensland coast embraces long awaited rainfall as ex-TC Winston makes landfall

Posted

Residents of far north Queensland's Cassowary Coast have welcomed long-awaited rainfall in the region as the remains of ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston pass overhead.

Staff at Paronella Park, on the banks of Mena Creek south of Innisfail, watched as the amount of water flowing over Mena Creek Falls turned from a gentle stream to a raging torrent in a matter of hours on Thursday.

"The rain probably started about 10 o'clock and didn't ease off until mid-afternoon, and you watch the [water level] go up every hour," operations manager Linzi Desmond said.

"This morning the water level's gone back down so you can see the edge of the creek bed, but that's how quickly it goes up and down."

Feluga resident Linda Brescansin lives on a tributary of Bulgun Creek, which recorded 215 millimetres of rain in the 24 hours prior to 9.00am Friday.

"The creeks are a bit swollen, not too bad, but I think they've remained steady for about the last 12 hours," Ms Brescansin said.

She said it was not uncommon for the creeks to break their banks, but ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston had not yet had as big an impact as some might have expected.

"Bulgun Creek is still probably five metres under the road so we still need a fair bit of rain and it's not actually raining right now."

Rainfall in the tropics: 'we love it'

As residents of what is arguably Australia's wettest region, both women played down reports that people in far north Queensland were bracing for the rainfall associated with ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston.

"When you get 200 millimetres [of rainfall] overnight, yes it's a huge amount, but after you've lived here for a little while it doesn't come as that much of a shock," Ms Desmond said.

"We just expect it; that's how it goes for three months of the year generally."

For Ms Brescansin the rain could not have come sooner.

"It's a little bit late in the year if anything. But it's usual, we love it and wouldn't live anywhere else."

Topics: rainfall, floods, tully-4854, innisfail-4860, cairns-4870, mena-creek-4871