TC Winston $2.98 billion damage caused by TC Winston The cost of damages caused by Tropical Cyclone Winston is USD$1.4 billion (FJD$2.98b) while 44 people were killed and 40,000 homes damaged or destroyed. This was revealed by Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama at the Opening Leaders Dialogue of the United Nations World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul, Turkey. BAINIMARAMA: “Three months ago, the biggest cyclone ever to […] Nacanieli Tuilevuka May 24, 2016 11:40 am

The cost of damages caused by Tropical Cyclone Winston is USD$1.4 billion (FJD$2.98b) while 44 people were killed and 40,000 homes damaged or destroyed.



This was revealed by Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama at the Opening Leaders Dialogue of the United Nations World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul, Turkey.

BAINIMARAMA: “Three months ago, the biggest cyclone ever to make landfall in the southern hemisphere slammed into Fiji with winds in excess of 300 kilometres an hour. Tropical Cyclone Winston killed 44 of our people, damaged or destroyed 40,000 homes and ravaged public buildings and infrastructure, including 229 schools.”

PM Bainimarama said Fiji and other vulnerable nations face the ever-present threat that a single event scoring a direct hit could devastate our economies for many years to come.

BAINIMARAMA: “While the damage bill amounts to 1.4 billion US dollars, Winston spared the main tourism areas on which our economy largely depends. But Fiji and other vulnerable nations face the ever-present threat that a single event scoring a direct hit could devastate our economies for many years to come. And make it difficult if not impossible to meet our 2030 Sustainable Development Goals.”

PM delivers Fiji's national statement on Winston's impact in Fiji pic.twitter.com/f31ERUpB2l — Fiji Mission Geneva (@FijiGeneva) May 23, 2016

PM Bainimarama said we must gain urgent access to adequate levels of finance in the way of grants or loans to build our resilience to climate change.

BAINIMARAMA: “We must gain urgent access to adequate levels of finance in the way of grants or loans to build our resilience to climate change. And I appeal to you all to give the issue of climate adaptation funding the overriding priority it deserves at this summit and in all the great forums of the world.”

PM Bainimarama said the Pacific are the looming prospect of vast tracts of arable land being lost to the seas and three entire countries sinking beneath the waves altogether.

BAINIMARAMA: “The proposed international mechanism to protect people displaced across borders because of natural disasters and climate change. It has particular relevance to Fiji because of our offer to give permanent refuge to the people of Kiribati and Tuvalu in the event that their nations are submerged by the rising seas caused by global warming.”

The United Nations World Humanitarian Summit ends today.