Government increases aid for Fiji by $1.5 million

SUPPLIED A young boy shows optimism despite the damage to the family house in the Rakiraki district from Tropical Cyclone Winston.

The Government has increased its aid package to Fiji by $1.5 million to help with recovery from Cyclone Winston.

The amount brings New Zealand's support to more than $4.7 million, including Defence Force assets and personnel.

Foreign Minister Murray McCully said the contribution was "designed to top up the supplies for reconstruction work" and to assist with getting the electricity grid working in Suva again.

$1million would go into repairing power lines and infrastructure, and $500k would go toward relief supplies and technical support.

Nearly 55,000 people were staying in evacuation centres, and McCully was able to see the destruction for himself as he flew over the coast of the main island on Monday.

READ MORE:

* Navy to send HMNZS Canterbury to Fiji

* Race against time to get aid to Fiji

* Cyclone Winston: Resident describes 'absolute devastation'

* Photos: An aerial view of the damage caused by Cyclone Winston

* Cyclone Winston: Families turn to prayer

* NZ government responds with an Orion and $59K in urgent aid

"It was like flying over an endless see of aeroplane crashes," he said.

"Where you've got a centre where the house used to be and then a trail of debris around it."

That pattern of devastation continued for kilometres, he said.

"The response is starting to move into the recovery phase, with a focus on restoring infrastructure such as electricity, water and transport," McCully said.

"NZDF C-130s are continuing to deliver supplies in support of the relief operation. HMNZS Canterbury will arrive in Fiji tomorrow and is expected to join HMNZS Wellington in the Northern Lau group by the end of the week."

Navy vessel HMNZS Wellington had arrived in Fiji and HMNZS Canterbury was on route with hundreds of tonnes of aid supplies and helicopters.

Fiji is in a state-of-emergency and the death toll sat at 29.The top priority for aid agencies was getting aid to the worst-affected communities

Unicef estimated more than 60,000 people, including 26,000 children, live in the worst-affected areas and more than 400,000 live in badly affected areas.

NZ-FIJI RELATIONS WARMING?

Minister McCully praised the "decision-making process" in Fiji on relief after he met with the Fiji's minister responsible for emergency management.

There would be an ongoing need for outside resources, but Fiji had "capacities of their own" and other nations needed to respect decisions, he said.

Relations between New Zealand and Fiji soured following the 2006 coup, and diplomacy was only restored when Fijian Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama's government was democratically elected in 2014.

When asked whether relations were warming further, McCully said: "We live in the same neighbourhood, we have to work together.

"We're going to have disagreements from time to time but when there is an urgent need to humanitarian support everybody in this neighbourhood understands you just knuckle down and deal with those needs."

- Stuff