Talavao Latu's said she was not concerned about the arrival of the cyclone as her farm's plants were protected by a greenhouse.

Authorities are assessing the damage from the deadly Cyclone Winston, which tore apart Fiji and the neighbouring Pacific kingdom of Tonga.

Access to food is a now a major concern in Tonga, where estimates suggest more than half of the island nation's food crops have been damaged.

Cyclone Winston caused strong winds and heavy rain in Tonga as a category two storm before the cyclone moved away, strengthened and returned to Tonga later in the same week causing further damage.

While there have been cyclone-related deaths in Fiji, Tongans are relieved they have escaped the severity.

However, agriculture crops were not so lucky, with coconut crops, banana plantations and vanilla bean farms most affected.

Vava'u vanilla farmer measures the cost

"It's been a bad season because of the tropical heat," vanilla farmer Talavao Latu explained.

"I think the plants are going to be very, very excited [that] it rained yesterday and today."

The Heilala vanilla farm was established in 2005 as an aid project after a previous cyclone ripped through Vava'u.

In a good year, they export nine tonnes of their dried vanilla product to New Zealand.

Ms Latu, whose farm grows more than 2,500 plants, was not concerned about the cyclone's arrival.

"We have a greenhouse to protect from a big hurricane, strong winds and stuff like that," she said.

Tongan agriculture industry damaged

Unfortunately this year Cyclone Winston has caused further heartache for the Tongan agricultural industry.

Ron Simpson is a retired Australian agronomist who lives in Tonga.

"The banana plantations are 85 to 95 per cent gone because they can't withstand strong wind," Mr Simpson said.

"It'll have a great effect on local supply for bananas, because at the present time there is no export of bananas out of Tonga, but that is being looked at.

"As far as vanilla goes, vanilla export is going to be affected for the export trade.

"A lot of the root crops, particularly the manioke, were smashed off.

"Some of those were getting close to be ready for harvest and most of those are utilised for local family food anyway.

"Things like taro, yams were fine because they sit prostrate and close to the ground.

"It's amazing; people are just very stoic [and] a lot of those guys out in the villages, farmers, they just keep going.

"When I was working for Agronomy Australia we used to agonise over drought.

"They just stoically build up and they think, well that's part of it and go again".

There are hopes for a better vanilla season once El Nino moves on and the extreme weather eases.