PM announces $70M Help for Homes initiative

Saturday 09/04/2016

Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama

Elizabeth Rokosuka

Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama has announced a $70 million Help for Homes initiative for those whose houses were damaged or partially destroyed by Tropical Cyclone Winston.

While making the announcement this morning at Suvavou House, Bainimarama says the initiative is designed to benefit affected Fijians who do not have the means to finance repairs on their own.

Bainimarama says these are for those whose household annual income falls under $50,000.

Bainimarama says these households will receive a prepaid electronic card with a set amount on it and pin number to purchase the building materials from selected hardware outlets.

Bainimarama says the card will have a sum of money depending on the type of damage sustained during the Cyclone and people will be given the freedom to choose which Hardware store they would like to purchase building materials from.

Bainimarama says after purchases are made, copies of the Fiji Institute of Engineers issued building code guidelines will be provided.

Bainimarama also says that they have names of individuals whose homes the National Disaster Management Office has identified as partially or severely damaged and this will be used to verify the claims made by applicants.

He adds other whose properties have not been assessed can also apply.

Bainimarama also says that those who requested for financial assistance from communities and employers to put a roof over their heads will get their funds reimbursed to the value provided for under the initiative.

The electronic cards provided by Vodafone Fiji are expected to be issued from the beginning of next month by the Ministry of Women, Children and Poverty Alleviation.

Bainimarama says the Government’s new partner in trying to rebuild houses, the Fiji Institute of Engineers has revealed that many public buildings, including schools erected in the past have failed to meet established building code standards let alone the higher standards Fiji is going to require in the future.

He says this includes certain buildings financed by Fiji’s developed partners that have not met the required standards.

Bainimarama also launched the Adopt A School website today.

The website shows schools which are in need of adoption with their full details in terms of intermediate cost and long term cost.

It also shows schools that have already been adopted by International partners like Australia and Indonesia.

The website can be easily accessed on www.adoptaschool.gov.fj.

Full Annoucement Speech on the $70 million Help for Homes initiative

ADVERTISEMENT

Listen to the latest news on our 5 radio stations Legend FM, Viti FM, Radio Sargam, FM96 and Navtarang.