Wild surf whipped up by ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston has inflicted dislocated shoulders, broken bones and other serious injuries, leading to the closure of all Gold Coast and most Sunshine Coast beaches.

Lifesavers treated a suspected spinal injury at Noosa Heads on the Sunshine Coast this afternoon, Surf Life Saving Queensland (SLSQ) tweeted.

It was one many injures they have seen over the past few days, with a woman breaking her leg in surf on the Gold Coast's Main Beach yesterday, and Sunshine Coast lifeguards recording six dislocated shoulders, seven back- and neck-related injuries, and a fractured leg.

As four-metre swell continued to pound the coast today, SLSQ announced that Gold Coast beaches will remain closed tomorrow.

The continuing "powerful and dangerous surf conditions" prompted the decision, SLSQ Gold Coast coordinator Nathan Fife said.

"I can’t stress enough how important it is for people to stay out of the water," he said.

A surfer rides a wave at Kirra Beach on the Gold Coast. (AAP)

"There are strong rips and gutters all across the Gold Coast, along with large swells and powerful waves."

SLSQ and Gold Coast City Council lifeguards will monitor conditions on Monday morning and then decide whether it is safe to reopen the beaches.

Kirra Beach was closed yesterday, and all Gold Coast beaches will remain closed until at least Monday. (AAP)

All Sunshine Coast beaches bar Noosa, Coolum and Bribie were closed today, and SLSQ is yet to decide which will be closed tomorrow.

The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) has issued a severe weather warning for abnormally high tides and dangerous surf for the southern coast.

Surfers have flocked to breaks, eager to ride the huge waves. (9NEWS)

BoM forecaster Annabelle Ford said the worst of the rough conditions were expected on Saturday and would then begin to ease.

"The cyclone will be slowly moving northwest over the next few days and start to decay from Sunday," she said.

A severe marine wind warning is also current for waters off Queensland's southern coast and NSW's Byron coast.

© Nine Digital Pty Ltd 2018