/ Front page / News

+ Enlarge this image This home in Cunnigham, Tamavua is partially damaged by a fallen tree. While Hurricane Winston is expected to h it Viti Levu by 7pm today, some areas in Suva are already feeling its impact. Picture: SOLOMONE RABULU

Update: 4:02PM MIGHTY Category 5 Tropical Cyclone Winston is now the strongest tropical cyclone and first Category 5 storm on record to hit Fiji.

Fiji's strongest cyclone to have been recorded was Category 4 Tropical Cyclone Evan of December 17, 2012 which walloped Fiji with sustained winds of 135 mph.

In a weather bulletin issued earlier this afternoon, FMS said TC Winston is moving west at about 25km per hour.

A hurricane warning remains in force for Vanuabalavu, Yacata, Mago, Cicia, Tuvuca, Nayau, Koro, Gau, Vanuavatu, Taveuni, Qamea, Laucala, Ovalau, Wakaya and Vanua Levu.

A storm warning is in place for Lakeba, Oneata, Moce, Komo, Namuka, Ogea, Moala, Viti Levu, Yasawa and Mamanuca Group.

A gale and heavy rain warning has also been issued for the rest of Fiji.

Islands in the Eastern Division can expect very destructive hurricane force winds with average speed of 220km per hour and momentary gusts to 315km per hour.

Heavy rain can result in flooding, including sea flooding of low-lying areas.

Source: Dr Jeff Masters

Fiji's Strongest Cyclone

Category 4 Tropical Cyclone Evan of December 17, 2012 walloped Fiji with sustained winds of 135 mph, as the storm's southern eyewall--the most intense part of the storm--brought hurricane conditions to a long stretch of the north and west coasts of Fiji's main island, Viti Levu. According to a database maintained by NOAA's Coastal Service Center, Evan was the strongest tropical cyclone on record to affect Fiji's main island, with records going back to 1941 (however, accurate satellite records extend back to only about 1990.) Evan did $109 million in damage (2012 dollars) to Fiji, making it the second most destructive storm in their history. The most devastating cyclone to affect Fiji in recent decades was Category 2 Cyclone Kina of January 1993, which killed 23 people and did $100 million in damage (1993 dollars.) The only deadlier storm than Kina was Category 3 Cyclone Eric of 1985, which made a direct hit on the capital of Suva, killing 25.