Information contained on this page is provided by an independent third-party content provider. WorldNow and this Station make no warranties or representations in connection therewith. If you have any questions or comments about this page please contact pressreleases@worldnow.com.

SOURCE Fiji Airways

"The best way for travellers to support is…to keep visiting"

NADI, Fiji, Feb. 25, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Fiji Airways, Fiji's national airline, has donated F$1m to the Prime Minister's National Disaster Relief and Rehabilitation Fund to assist those affected by Cyclone Winston. Fiji Airways Managing Director and CEO, Andre Viljoen, handed the check over today to Fijian Prime Minister, Rear Admiral (Ret'd) Hon. Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama. The airline has also announced free carriage of relief supplies domestically and inbound from other countries coordinated through the National Disaster Management Office (NDMO).

All Fiji Airways flights have now resumed their normal services from Los Angeles (LAX) and Honolulu (HNL) direct to Nadi (NAN), Fiji, and beyond, with international connections to Australia, New Zealand and the South Pacific Islands all operating as scheduled. Domestic Fiji Link connections within Fiji to popular destinations for U.S. travellers, including Taveuni and Savusavu, are also operating as scheduled.

The Attorney General and Minister for Civil Aviation, Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum, said the Government, through Tourism Fiji, is working with Fiji Airways and industry stakeholders on a comprehensive plan to maintain the health of the industry in the wake of Cyclone Winston. "We need to get the message out to our key markets that most Fijian resorts are open and functioning. The best way for travellers to support Fiji through this crisis is to keep visiting us. There is no need for intending holidaymakers to cancel or postpone their visits," the AG said.

When you travel with Fiji Airways, you do more than just fly - you help our local Fijian communities. Take a look at 'Why We Fly'.

For more information on how you can help the Fijian community, see www.fijiairways.com

About Fiji Airways: Founded in 1951, Fiji Airways Group comprises of Fiji Airways, Fiji's National Airline and its subsidiaries: Fiji Link, its domestic and regional carrier, Pacific Call Comm Ltd, and a 38.75% stake in the Sofitel Fiji Resort & Spa on Denarau Island, Nadi. From its hub at Nadi International Airport, Fiji Airways and Fiji Link serve 49 destinations in 13 countries (including code-share). Destinations include Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Singapore, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu, Kiribati, Vanuatu and Solomon Islands. Fiji Airways rebranded from Air Pacific in June 2013. Visit www.fijiairways.com for more information.

For media inquiries, please contact:

Jaclyn Gaffaney & Lauren Hammerson

Myriad Marketing for Fiji Airways

Jaclyn@myriadmarketing.com

LaurenH@myriadmarketing.com

+1 310-649-7700

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140110/LA44052LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/fiji-airways-donates-f1-million-to-prime-ministers-relief-fund-300226451.html

©2016 PR Newswire. All Rights Reserved.



