Far north Queensland coast braces for ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston, could bring up to 300mm of rain

Updated

Parts of the Queensland coast between Cairns and Townsville could cop up to 300 millimetres of rain within 24 hours, thanks to a low associated with ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston.

The system, which is currently located over the Coral Sea approximately 110 kilometres east of Cairns, is expected to move slowly inland on Friday.

It prompted the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) to issue a severe weather warning, which predicted areas of heavy rain that could lead to flash flooding.

Locations which may be affected include Cairns, Ingham, Innisfail, Mareeba, Cardwell and Atherton.

"Six-hour rainfall accumulations in the 150 to 200 millimetre range are possible, with some 24 hour totals in excess of 300 millimetres likely," the warning read.

BoM Cairns forecaster Bill O'Connor said the low pressure system was expected to impact the area throughout Friday.

"The main influence will be on the southern side of this weak low as it makes its way across and we get the convergence in the area between Townsville through to about Cairns, especially targeting the Cassowary Coast.

"We'll see some quite heavy falls .... and we expect showers to persist right through the weekend."

A Flood Watch is current for coastal catchments between Rollingstone and Cape Tribulation.

The weather warning has prompted Queensland Fire and Emergency Service (QFES) to deploy additional swift water rescue crews to north Queensland ahead of time.

QFES's Steve Barber said crews had already been deployed to Ingham and Townsville.

"We've also got crews as far down as Bowen as well," he said.

"We'll cover right up from Cardwell to Bowen and also out to Charters Towers and further west right out to Mount Isa as well. We're not expecting the rain to go that far but we have pre-positioned crews just in case."

QFES advises that people should:

Never drive, walk or ride through flood waters

Keep clear of creeks and storm drains

For emergency assistance contact the SES on 132 500

Topics: weather, townsville-4810, cairns-4870

First posted