UPDATE: A severe weather warning has been cancelled for Far North Queensland as ex-Tropical cyclone Winston continues to bring rainfall across the region.

A deep trough extends from about Kowanyama to Cooktown and then eastwards into the northern Coral Sea. Another trough lies just offshore of the tropical coastline.

Rain areas, showers and storms are still expected over the northeastern tropics and should also develop further about the Central Coast and Whitsundays district.

Some 24 hour rainfall totals in excess of 200mm remain likely, however, the more intense rainfall is expected to occur with thunderstorms.

Severe thunderstorm warnings will be issued as necessary.

In the 24 hours to 9am Friday:

Bulgun Creek recorded 215mm

Bingil Bay – 204mm

Tully – 175mm

Babinda – 155mm

Innisfail – 140mm

For assistance contact the SES on 132 500 or in an emergency call 000.

Cairns radar loop

------------------

UPDATE: Ex-tropical cyclone Winston has made landfall, bringing likely heavy rain and storms across Far North Queensland today.

media_camera LANDFALL: Ex-tropical cyclone Winston is expected to move slowly westwards, further inland, during today. IMAGE: BUREAU OF METEOROLOGY

The tropical low is expected to move slowly westwards, further inland, during today. A deep trough extends eastwards from the low into the western Coral Sea.

Heavy rain and thunderstorm clusters are set to strike areas between Cape Tribulation and Townsville at first, but is likely to extend further inland.

Six hour rainfall accumulations in the 150 to 200 mm range are possible, with some 24 hour totals in excess of 300mm likely.

A Flood Watch is also current for coastal Catchments between Rollingstone and Cape Tribulation.

Locations which may be affected include Cairns, Port Douglas, Mossman, Ingham, Innisfail, Mareeba, Cardwell, Tully, Atherton, Gordonvale, Daintree Village, Ravenshoe and Babinda.

------------------

UPDATE: Ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston is now about 110km east of Cairns and is expected to close in further along Far North Queensland’s coastline this evening.

Areas of heavy rain, which may lead to flash flooding, are expected to develop this evening, and continue into Friday.

This will mostly be about the coast to ranges between Cairns and Townsville, and extending inland during Friday.

Six hour rainfall accumulations in the 150 to 200 mm range are possible, with some 24 hour totals in excess of 300mm likely.

A Flood Watch is current for coastal Catchments between Rollingstone and Cape Tribulation.

Locations which may be affected include Cairns, Ingham, Innisfail, Mareeba, Cardwell and Atherton.

------------------

UPDATE: Ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston is currently located just off the North Tropical Coast, approximately 150km east of Cairns.

It is expected to move slowly westwards towards the coast during today, and move inland during Friday.

Areas of heavy rain, which may lead to flash flooding, are expected to develop over the warning area this afternoon and evening, and continue into Friday.

This will mostly be about the coast to ranges between Cairns and Townsville, and extending inland during Friday.

Six hour rainfall accumulations in the 150 to 200 mm range are possible, with some 24 hour totals in excess of 300mm likely.

Locations which may be affected include Cairns, Ingham, Innisfail, Mareeba, Cardwell and Atherton.

Cairns Regional Council is advising residents to make preparations for possible flooding of low-lying areas as a result of heavy rainfall expected over the coming days.

Cairns residents are being urged not to walk, ride or drive through flood waters and to adhere to signs advising that roads are closed.

Motorists should find alternate ways which are free from floodwater or wait until the all clear is given for that road. It is safer to turn around than to enter floodwater.

------------------

EARLIER: Ex-Tropical Cyclone Winston is expected to bring rain to Far North Queensland from today.

The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe weather warning for the region, with areas of heavy rain, which may lead to flash flooding, expected to develop today and continue Friday between Townsville and Cairns.

This will mostly be about the coast to ranges between Cairns and Townsville.

Six hour rainfall accumulations in the 150 to 200 mm range are possible, with some 24 hour totals in excess of 300mm likely.

Locations which may be affected include Ingham, Innisfail, Cardwell, Tully, Gordonvale and Babinda.

For assistance contact the SES on 132 500 or in an emergency call 000.