Squeezed by rising interest rates, homeowners who stretched their finances to buy properties while the market was hot are scrambling to pay higher monthly payments on adjustable-rate mortgages that were the least expensive option at the time they purchased their homes.

An end to years of double-digit appreciation in Massachusetts home values has shut the door on refinancings that bailed thousands of homeowners out of bad financial decisions, said mortgage brokers and counselors as well as homeowners.

”The bottom line is so many people took the fashionable mortgage rather than the right mortgage,” said Harry Brousaides Jr., president of NorthStar Mortgage Corp. in Westwood. Now, he said, ”they’re sweating it and not knowing what the future will bring.”

The main culprit of homeowners’ woes was a 50 percent increase in home values in Massachusetts between 2000 and 2003, the largest rate of appreciation in the nation. Buyers struggling to finance a home took on mortgages with low adjustable rates that nevertheless swallowed half their monthly take-home pay, leaving little financial cushion.

The first to experience difficulty are those with no-down-payment mortgages, a product that was popular among buyers who could not save enough for a substantial down payment on a high-priced home, mortgage counselors and brokers said. The no-down-payment loans got them into the market quickly, before they were locked out by rising prices. But, as rates increased, these loans, which often carry an adjustable interest rate, become more expensive.

”A lot of people live paycheck to paycheck, and they’re losing a couple hundred bucks a month” due to higher rates, said Edmund Poli of Poli Mortgage Group in Norwood. More homeowners are coming to his firm for help, but ”sometimes there’s not much they can do because they have 100 percent financing.”

Rates have not risen that much yet. But if they continue to rise or if housing values fall sharply, said Thomas Callahan, executive director of the Massachusetts Affordable Housing Alliance, the current pinch on some homeowners may be the tip of the iceberg.

”People have put problems off by multiple financings and increasing equity,” he said. As a last resort in a rising market, he said, people could sell the house and pay off the loans. But if prices decline, selling a house will not generate enough cash to pay off a loan.

”I have a sense it could get ugly soon,” he said.

In March 2004, John Ryan, a postman in Brighton, received a no-down-payment loan for his $430,000, three-family home in Framingham. He and his wife, a nursing student, live in one unit. Rents from two apartments cover all but $900 of their $3,600 monthly payment, which increased after renovation expenses — for new bathroom tile and kitchen cabinets — were rolled into the second mortgage.