Nouriel Roubini's Blog Nouriel Roubini's Blog When mainstream analysts compare CDOs to “subslime”, “toxic waste” and “six-inch hooker heels”… You know you have a serious problem with subprime-related CDOs and the housing and mortgage markets when mainstream analysts compare CDOs and mortgage backed securities to “subslime”, “toxic waste” and “six-inch hooker heels”… The conservative Kudlow had a heading in his show last nite that referred to CDOs and to the Bear Stearns CDO scandal as “subslime”: indeed now it is not just an issue of the two failing Bear hedge funds but also the apparently sleazy or “sub-slime” Everquest scandal. At the same time the most reputable financial guru Bill Gross (the head of Pimco, the biggest bond fund in the world) referred to CDOs as “six-inch hooker heels”, “tramp stamp” and “toxic waste”. In his monthly note published this week Bill Gross sarcastically referred to the ratings (better call them “mis-ratings”) of the CDOs by the credit “rating” agencies as follows: “AAA? You were wooed Mr. Moody’s and Mr. Poor’s, by the makeup, those six-inch hooker heels, and a “tramp stamp.” Many of these good looking girls are not high-class assets worth 100 cents on the dollar. . And sorry Ben, but derivatives are a two-edged sword. Yes, they diversify risk and direct it away from the banking system into the eventual hands of unknown buyers, but they multiply leverage like the Andromeda strain. When interest rates go up, the Petri dish turns from a benign experiment in financial engineering to a destructive virus because the cost of that leverage ultimately reduces the price of assets. Houses anyone?… AAAs? Folks the point is that there are hundreds of billions of dollars of this toxic waste and whether or not they’re in CDOs or Bear Stearns hedge funds matters only to the extent of the timing of the unwind. To death and taxes you can add this to your list of inevitabilities: the subprime crisis is not an isolated event and it won’t be contained by a few days of headlines in The New York Times… Because the problem lies not in a Bear Stearns hedge fund that can be papered over with 100 cents on the dollar marks. The flaw resides in the Summerlin suburbs of Las Vegas, Nevada, in the extended city limits of Chicago headed west towards Rockford, and yes, the naked (and empty) rows of multistoried condos in Miami, Florida. The flaw, dear readers, lies in the homes that were financed with cheap and in some cases gratuitous money in 2004, 2005, and 2006. Because while the Bear hedge funds are now primarily history, those millions and millions of homes are not. They’re not going anywhere…except for their mortgages that is. Mortgage payments are going up, up, and up…and so are delinquencies and defaults. A recent research piece by Bank of America estimates that approximately $500 billion of adjustable rate mortgages are scheduled to reset skyward in 2007 by an average of over 200 basis points. 2008 holds even more surprises with nearly $700 billion ARMS subject to reset, nearly ¾ of which are subprimes… This problem — aided and abetted by Wall Street — ultimately resides in America’s heartland, with millions and millions of overpriced homes and asset-backed collateral with a different address — Main Street.” The fallout of this CDO mess is likely to end up into $100 billion plus of losses for banks, financial institutions, hedge funds and investors once these CDOs and subprime mortgage backed securities are marked-to-market rather than being marked-to-a-delusional-misrated-model. Thus, the Bear disaster is only the tip of the iceberg of a much bigger financial mess that will unravel in the next few months: the pile of rising subprime and nearprime delinquencies will take a toll on the toxic waste of mortgage backed securities that a rating “voodoo magic” pretended to turn below-junk securities into A-rated ones. But Bill Gross is indeed also correct in pointing out that the source of this sub-prime slime and now CDO carnage is the biggest US housing recession in the last few decades . As if the bad news from the housing market in the last few weeks were not bad enough another batch of ugly news came out yesterday and today: - home prices falling further (2.1% y-o-y) based on the S&P/ Shiller and Case index; - the biggest US homebuilder – Lennar - reporting large and unexpected losses for Q2 and worsening conditions for the rest of the year; - new home sales for May down again and previous months sales revised further downward. - mortgage applications falling 3.9% in the last week and 4.9% for purchase applications; - subprime delinquencies rising and the credit crunch in the subprime market getting worse The delinquency rate for subprime mortgages increased to 13.8% in Q1, according to the MBA, up from the already high 11.5% a year before. - near-prime Alt-A delinquencies are rising sharply : late payments of at least 90 days and defaults on 2006 Alt A mortgages have increased to 4.21 percent, up from 1.59 percent for 2005 mortgages and 0.81 percent for 2004 mortgages, as reported by S&P. So the subprime carnage is now spreading to near prime mortgages. No wonder that all these lousy news about housing and gasoline prices sky high have depressed the US consumer with consumer confidence now significantly down. And no wonder that the latest news from retail sales are also lousy. As reported by the International Council of Shopping Centers and UBS in the last two reporting week same store chain store sales have been down (-0.7% in the last week) while the year-over-year growth rate of such sales is now down to 1.7% (i.e. falling in real terms relative to a year ago). Add to that a 2.8% fall in durable goods orders for May and a survey of major CFOs suggesting that they are planning to cut capex spending and accumulate less inventories. Blood bath in the housing market, turmoil in financial markets and rise in credit spreads, risks of financial contagion, subprime credit crunch now spreading to other parts of the mortgage market, plunging consumer confidence, falling retail sales, falling capex investment by the corporate sector: it looks fugly and fuglier for the financial markets and the real economy. In Q1 we had already a “growth recession” with GDP growth at a dismally low 0.6%; Q2 may be slightly better but the outlook for second half of 2007 looks pretty ugly. The growth recession of the last quarter is highly likely to persist throughout 2007 with the risks of an outright recession being still high.

Comments Post A Comment By posting a comment to this blog, you are agreeing to the RGE Monitor Web Logs Terms of Use below.



RGE Monitor Web Logs Terms of Use ("Terms of Use") This page states the "RGE Monitor Web Log Terms of Use" under which You may use all RGE Monitor Web Logs (RGE Blog Sites), an online service to post and search ideas on global macro and geostrategic information, an online community designed to facilitate valuable professional and personal networking among its users based on common experiences and interests ("RGEMonitor.com" or "Web Site"). These Terms of Use include the RGE Privacy Policy, the RGE Monitor Terms of Use and the RGE Premium Fee Policy, each of which is incorporated into these Terms of Use by reference. By using Rgemonitor.com, You are indicating your agreement to these Terms of Use, including the RGE Privacy Statement. This is a Web log reflecting the opinions of its author. It is unaffiliated with any NASD broker/dealer. Statements on this site do not represent the views or policies of anyone other than the author and contributors. The information on this site is provided for discussion purposes only, and is not investing recommendation. Under no circumstances does this information represent a recommendation to buy or sell securities. Please read these terms in their entirety. If You do not accept the Terms of Use stated here, do not use the RGE Monitor.com, RGE Blog Sites and the services. By using Rgemonitor.com, You are indicating your acceptance to be bound by the provisions of these Terms of Use. Roubini Global Economics, LLC ("RGE" or the "Company") may revise these Terms of Use at any time by updating this posting. You should visit this page periodically to review the Terms of Use, because they are binding on You. The terms "You" and "User" as used herein refer to all individuals and/or entities accessing this Web site for any reason. 1. Eligibility. You must be 18 years of age or older to visit or use Rgemonitor.com in any manner. By visiting Rgemonitor.com or accepting these Terms of Use, You represent and warrant to the Company that You are 18 years of age or older, and that You have the right, authority and capacity to agree to and abide by these Terms of Use. You also represent and warrant to the Company that You will use Rgemonitor.com in a manner consistent with any and all applicable laws and regulations. 2. Use of RGE Content. The Company authorizes You to view and access a single copy of the content available on or from Rgemonitor.com Web logs solely for your personal use. The contents of Rgemonitor.com, and of all other Web sites under the Company's control, whether partial or otherwise (Rgemonitor.com and such other Web sites are sometimes collectively referred to as "RGE Sites") such as text, graphics, images, logos, button icons, software and other RGE Content (collectively, "RGE Content"), are protected under both United States and foreign copyright, trademark and other laws. All RGE Content is the property of the Company or its content suppliers or clients. The compilation (meaning the collection, arrangement and assembly) of all content on the RGE Blog Sites are the exclusive property of the Company and protected by U.S. and international copyright laws. Unauthorized use of the RGE Content may violate copyright, trademark, and other laws. You must retain all copyright, trademark, servicemark and other proprietary notices contained in the original RGE Content on any copy You make of the RGE Content. You may not sell or modify the RGE Content or reproduce, display, publicly perform, distribute, or otherwise use the RGE Content in any way for any public or commercial purpose. The use of the RGE Content on any other Web site or in a networked computer environment for any purpose is prohibited. You shall not copy or adapt the HTML code that the Company creates to generate any RGE Content or the pages making up any RGE Site which is also protected by the Company's copyright. 3. RGE Blog Restrictions. Users may not use any RGE Site in order to transmit, distribute, store or destroy material, including without limitation RGE Content, (a) in violation of any applicable law or regulation, (b) in a manner that will infringe the copyright, trademark, trade secret or other intellectual property rights of others or violate the privacy, publicity or other personal rights of others, or (c) that is defamatory, obscene, threatening, abusive or hateful. Users are also prohibited from violating or attempting to violate the security of any RGE Web logs and the RGE Site, including, without limitation the following activities: (a) accessing data not intended for such user or logging into a server or account which the user is not authorized to access; (b) attempting to probe, scan or test the vulnerability of a system or network or to breach security or authentication measures without proper authorization; (c) attempting to interfere with service to any user, host or network, including, without limitation, via means of submitting a virus to any RGE Site, overloading, "flooding", "spamming", "mailbombing" or "crashing"; or (d) forging any TCP/IP packet header or any part of the header information in any e-mail or newsgroup posting. Violations of system or network security may result in civil or criminal liability. The Company will investigate occurrences which may involve such violations and may involve, and cooperate with, law enforcement authorities in prosecuting users who are involved in such violations. 4. Specific Prohibited Uses and Editorial Approval RGE Web Logs and the Rgemonitor.com Site may be used only for lawful purposes by individuals seeking to view and post commentary related to Global Macro Economics and Geostrategic information. The Company specifically prohibits any other use of Rgemonitor.com, and all Users agree not to do any of the following: (a) post any jobs on any RGE Site or other content that contains links to any site competitive with RGE; (b) post content on any RGE Site that contains any hyperlinks, "hidden" keywords or any keywords that are irrelevant to the themes posted on the blog. (c) send unsolicited mail or e-mail, making unsolicited phone calls or send unsolicited faxes regarding promotions and/or advertising of products or services to a user of any RGE Site; (d) delete or revise any material posted by any other person or entity; (e) take any action that imposes an unreasonable or disproportionately large load on any RGE Site's infrastructure; (f) notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, use or attempt to use any engine, software, tool, agent or other device or mechanism (including without limitation browsers, spiders, robots, avatars or intelligent agents) to navigate or search any RGE Site other than the search engine and search agents available from the Company on such RGE Site and other than generally available third party Web browsers (e.g., Netscape Navigator, Microsoft Internet Explorer); (g) attempt to decipher, decompile, disassemble or reverse engineer any of the software comprising or in any way making up a part of any RGE Site; (h) aggregate, copy or duplicate in any manner any of the RGE Content or information available from any RGE Site; or (i) frame or link to any of RGE Content or information available from any RGE Site. 5. Web Log Registration Information. When You register with any RGE Web log, You will be asked to provide the Company with certain information including, without limitation, a valid e-mail address (your "Information"). In addition to the Terms of Use and any privacy policy applicable to any RGE Web Site, You understand and agree that the Company may disclose to third parties, on an anonymous basis, certain aggregate information contained in your registration application. The Company will not disclose to any third party your name, address, e-mail address or telephone number without your prior consent, except to the extent necessary or appropriate to comply with applicable laws or in legal proceedings where such information is relevant. Without limiting any of the other disclaimers of warranty set forth in these Terms of Use, RGE does not provide or make any representation as to the quality or nature of any of the third party products or services purchased through the Rgemonitor.com or any other RGE Site, or any other representation, warranty or guaranty. Any such undertaking, representation, warranty or guarantee would be furnished solely by the provider of the applicable class, or learning material, product or service, under the terms agreed to by the provider. 6. User Content and Submissions. You are solely responsible for your RGE registration and account information, content, messages or other information ("User Content") that You submit, publish or display (herein after, "post") on any RGE Site or transmit to other Users. By posting User Content to any RGE Site, You automatically grant, and You represent and warrant that You have the right to grant, to RGE an irrevocable, perpetual, non-exclusive, fully paid, worldwide license to use, copy, perform, display, and distribute such User Content and to prepare derivative works of, or incorporate into other works, such User Content, and to grant and authorize sublicenses thereof. By posting User Content to any public or non-public area of any RGE Site, including message boards and forums, You grant the Company and its affiliates the royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable, sublicenseable (through multiple tiers), non-exclusive right (including any moral rights) and license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, communicate to the public, perform and display the User Content (in whole or in part) worldwide and/or to incorporate it in other works in any form, media, or technology now known or later developed, for the full term of any rights that may exist in such content. You also warrant that the holder of any rights, including moral rights in such content, has completely and effectively waived all such rights and validly and irrevocably granted to You the right to grant the license stated above. You also permit any User to access, display, view, store and reproduce such User Content for personal use. Subject to the foregoing, the owner of such User Content placed any RGE Site retains any and all rights that may exist in such User Content. The Company acts as a passive conduit for the online distribution and publication of User Content and has no obligation to screen communications or information in advance and is not responsible for screening or monitoring User Content posted by Users. However, the Company may review and delete any User Content that, in the sole judgment of RGE, violates these Terms of Use, violates applicable law, rule or regulation, is offensive or illegal or violates the rights of, harms or threatens the safety of Users of any RGE Site. The Company reserves the right to expel Users and prevent their further access to the RGE Blog Sites for violating the Terms of Use or applicable law, rule or regulation and the right to remove User Content which is in violation of the Terms of Use, abusive, illegal, or disruptive. The Company may take any action with respect to User Content that it deems necessary or appropriate in its sole discretion if it believes it may create liability for the Company or may cause the Company to lose (in whole or in part) the services of its ISPs or other suppliers. The following is a partial list of User Content that is prohibited on the RGE Blog Sites. The list below is for illustration only and is not a complete list of all prohibited User Content: - is implicitly or explicitly offensive, such as User Content that engages in, endorses or promotes racism, bigotry, hatred or physical harm of any kind against any group or individual; - harasses, incites harassment or advocates harassment of another any group or individual; - involves the transmission of "junk mail", "chain letters," or unsolicited mass mailing or "spamming"; - promotes or endorses false or misleading information or illegal activities or conduct that is abusive, threatening, obscene, defamatory or libelous; - promotes or endorses an illegal or unauthorized copy of another person's copyrighted work, such as providing or making available pirated computer programs or links to them, providing or making available information to circumvent manufacture-installed copy-protect devices, or providing or making available pirated music or other media or links to pirated music or other media files; - contains restricted or password only access pages, or hidden pages or images; - displays or links to pornographic, indecent or sexually explicit material of any kind; - provides or links to material that exploits people under the age of 18 in a sexual, violent or other manner, or solicits personal information from anyone under 18; or - provides instructional information about illegal activities or other activities prohibited by these Terms, including without limitation, making or buying illegal weapons, violating someone's privacy, or provides or creates computer viruses or pirating any media; and solicits passwords or personal identifying information from other Users; It is also a violation of the Terms of Use, to include in any User Content submitted to RGE Monitor that may be interpreted as direct solicitation, advertisement or recruitment for an available job position directed to individuals seeking employment on either a full time or part time basis. In order to protect our RGE Monitor Users from unauthorized commercial advertising or solicitation, RGE reserves the right to restrict the number of Comments a user may send in a 24 hour period to a number which RGE deems appropriate in its sole discretion. RGE reserves the right in its sole discretion to investigate and take legal action against anyone who engages in any illegal or prohibited conduct or otherwise violates these Terms of Use, including without limitation, removing the User Content from the RGE Blog Sites and/or terminating the offending User's ability to access the RGE Blog Sites and/or use RGE services. The Company may take any other action with respect to User Content or User actions that it deems necessary or appropriate in its sole discretion if it believes it may create liability for the Company or may cause the Company to lose (in whole or in part) the services of its ISPs or other suppliers. The Company does not represent or guarantee the truthfulness, accuracy, or reliability of User Content or any other communications posted by Users or endorse any opinions expressed by Users. You acknowledge that any reliance on material posted by other Users will be at your own risk. The Company has no obligation to screen User Content in advance and is not responsible for screening or monitoring User Content posted by Users. If notified by a User of communications which allegedly do not conform to these Terms of Use, the Company may in its sole discretion investigate the allegation and determine whether to take any other actions whether to remove or request the removal of the User Content. The Company has no liability or responsibility to Users for performance or nonperformance of such activities. We appreciate hearing from our Users and welcome your comments regarding our services and the RGE Monitor Site. Please be advised, however, that our policy does not permit us to accept or consider creative ideas, suggestions, inventions or materials other than those which we have specifically requested. While we do value your feedback on our services, please be specific in your comments regarding our services and do not submit creative ideas, inventions, suggestions, or materials. If, despite our request, You send us creative suggestions, ideas, drawings, concepts, inventions, or other information (collectively the "Submission"), the Submission shall be the property of the Company. None of the Submission shall be subject to any obligation of confidentiality on our part and we shall not be liable for any use or disclosure of any Submission. The Company shall own exclusively all now known or later discovered rights to the Submission and shall be entitled to unrestricted use of the Submission for any purpose whatsoever, commercial or otherwise, without compensation to You or any other person who submitted the Submission. 7. Registration and Password. You are responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of your RGE Account, RGE Registration, passwords, and if You are a RGE Subscriber, your Billing Account. You shall be responsible for all uses of your Web Site registrations and passwords, whether or not authorized by You. You agree to immediately notify the Company of any unauthorized use of your RGE Account. 8. The Company's Liability. Rgemonitor.com acts as an information service that aggregated global macro economic and geostrategic information. The Company is not involved in the actual transactions based on the content posted on the RGE Site. As a result, the Company has no control over the quality, safety or legality of the linked content. Because user authentication on the Internet is difficult, the Company cannot and does not confirm that each User is who they claim to be. Because we do not and cannot be involved in user-to-user dealings or control the behavior of participants on any RGE Site, in the event that You have a dispute with one or more Users, You release the Company (and our agents and employees) from claims, demands and damages (actual and consequential, direct and indirect) of every kind and nature, known and unknown, suspected and unsuspected, disclosed and undisclosed, arising out of or in any way connected with such disputes. If You are a California resident, You waive California Civil Code d1542, which says: "A general release does not extend to claims which the creditor does not know or suspect to exist in his favor at the time of executing the release, which if known by him must have materially affected his settlement with the debtor." The RGE Blog Sites and the RGE Content may contain inaccuracies or typographical errors. The Company makes no representations about the accuracy, reliability, completeness, or timeliness of any RGE Site or the RGE Content. The use of all RGE Blog Sites and the RGE Content is at your own risk. Changes are periodically made to RGE Blog Sites and may be made at any time. You acknowledge and agree that You are solely responsible for the form, content and accuracy of any material contained therein placed by You on the RGE Blog Sites. Employers are solely responsible for their postings on RGE Blog Sites. The Company is not to be considered to be an employer with respect to your use of any RGE Site. RGE cannot guarantee and does not promise any specific results from use of Rgemonitor.com or any RGE Site. No advice or information, whether oral or written, obtained by a User from RGE or through or from Rgemonitor.com or any other RGE Site shall create any warranty not expressly stated herein. 9. Disclaimer of Warranty. THE COMPANY DOES NOT WARRANT THAT ANY RGE SITE WILL OPERATE ERROR-FREE OR THAT ANY RGE SITE AND ITS SERVERS ARE FREE OF COMPUTER VIRUSES OR OTHER HARMFUL MECHANISMS. IF YOUR USE OF ANY RGE SITE OR THE RGE CONTENT RESULTS IN THE NEED FOR SERVICING OR REPLACING EQUIPMENT OR DATA, THE COMPANY IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR THOSE COSTS. THE RGE BLOG SITES AND RGE CONTENT ARE PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND. THE COMPANY, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING THE WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. THE COMPANY MAKES NO WARRANTIES ABOUT THE ACCURACY, RELIABILITY, COMPLETENESS, OR TIMELINESS OF THE RGE CONTENT, SERVICES, SOFTWARE, TEXT, GRAPHICS, AND LINKS. 10. Disclaimer of Consequential Damages. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COMPANY, ITS SUPPLIERS, OR ANY THIRD PARTIES MENTIONED ON ANY RGE SITE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, INCIDENTAL AND CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, LOST PROFITS, OR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM LOST DATA OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) RESULTING FROM THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE ANY RGE SITE AND THE RGE CONTENT, WHETHER BASED ON WARRANTY, CONTRACT, TORT, OR ANY OTHER LEGAL THEORY, AND WHETHER OR NOT THE COMPANY IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 11. Limitation of Liability. NEITHER ROUBINI GLOBAL ECONOMICS NOR ANY OF ITS MEMBERS, DIRECTORS, EMPLOYEES OR OTHER REPRESENTATIVES WILL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OF THIS SITE OR ANY INFORMATION, PRODUCTS OR SERVICES CONTAINED HEREIN, WHICH INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE MATERIALS, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF. THIS IS A COMPREHENSIVE LIMITATION OF LIABILITY THAT APPLIES TO ALL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, INDIRECT, SPECIAL AND CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, LOSS OF DATA, INCOME, PROFIT OR GOODWILL, LOSS OF OR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY AND CLAIMS OF THIRD PARTIES. 12. Links to Other Sites. Rgemonitor.com and certain other RGE Blog Sites contain links to third party Web sites. These links are provided solely as a convenience to You and not as an endorsement by the Company of the contents on such third-party Web sites. The Company is not responsible for the content of linked third-party sites and does not make any representations regarding the content or accuracy of materials on such third party Web sites. If You decide to access linked third-party Web sites, You do so at your own risk. 13. No Resale or Unauthorized Commercial Use. You agree not to resell or assign your rights or obligations under these Terms of Use. You also agree not to make any unauthorized commercial use of any RGE Site. 14. Indemnity. You agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Company, its affiliates, and their respective officers, directors, employees and agents, from and against any claims, actions or demands, including without limitation reasonable legal and accounting fees, alleging or resulting from (i) any User Content or other material You provide to any RGE Site, (ii) your use of any RGE Content, or (iii) your breach of the terms of these Terms of Use. The Company shall provide notice to You promptly of any such claim, suit, or proceeding. 15. General. The Company makes no claims that the RGE Content may be lawfully viewed or accessed outside of the United States. Access to the RGE Content may not be legal by certain persons or in certain countries. If You access a Rgemonitor.com or other U.S.-based RGE Blog Sites from outside of the United States, You do so at your own risk and are responsible for compliance with the laws of your jurisdiction. These Terms of Use are governed by the internal substantive laws of the New York, without respect to its conflict of laws principles. Jurisdiction for any claims arising under this agreement shall lie exclusively with the State or Federal courts within New York. If any provision of these Terms of Use is found to be invalid by any court having competent jurisdiction, the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of these Terms of Use, which shall remain in full force and effect. No waiver of any term of these Terms of Use shall be deemed a further or continuing waiver of such term or any other term. Except as expressly provided in an additional agreement, additional terms of use for areas of Rgemonitor.com, a particular "Legal Notice," or License or material on particular Web pages, the Terms of Use and the Web Log Terms of Use constitute the entire agreement between You and the Company with respect to the use of Rgemonitor.com. No changes to these Terms of Use shall be made except by a revised posting on this page. 16. Additional Terms of Use. Certain areas of Rgemonitor.com and the other RGE Blog Sites are subject to additional terms of use. By using such areas, or any part thereof, You agree to be bound by the additional terms of use applicable to such areas. 17. Term and Termination These Terms of Use will remain in full force and effect while You are a User of Rgemonitor.com at any level. The Company reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to pursue all of its legal remedies, including but not limited to deletion of your User Content from Rgemonitor.com and the other RGE Blog Sites and immediate termination of your registration with or ability to access Rgemonitor.com and the other RGE Blog Sites and/or any other services provided to You by the Company, upon any breach by You of these Terms of Use or if the Company is unable to verify or authenticate any information You submit to Rgemonitor.com or other RGE Site registration. Even after You are no longer a User of Rgemonitor.com, certain provisions of these Terms of Use will remain in effect, including Sections 2, 6, 8(c), 11 through 22, inclusive. Document last modified on July 18, 2005



To help maintain the integrity of the conversation we ask that each user simply paste the keyword (below in red) into the confirmation field below. Sorry, but if you forget this step, your comments will not be saved!

