Nouriel Roubini's Blog Nouriel Roubini's Blog Who is to Blame for the Mortgage Carnage and Coming Financial Disaster? Unregulated Free Market Fundamentalism Zealotry The sub-prime and overall mortgage carnage is now likely to lead to a financial crisis whose cleanup and bailout costs will make the S&L bailout bill look like spare change. We are only at the beginning of this fallout but, already, several proposals and bills in Congress have been submitted to help millions of sub-prime homeowners on the verge of bankruptcy and foreclosure. The prospect of millions of homeowners thrown homeless on the street is already shaking politicians of every stripe. The relatively modest bailout envisaged by the first bills currently proposed in Congress will mushroom into a much bigger fiscal bailout of homeowners, borrowers and lenders once the garbage of sub-prime, near-prime and pseudo-prime toxic waste spreads around the economy and likely leads to a hard landing recession that will cause a much bigger financial and banking crisis. Given the fallout and real, social and financial costs of this disaster the political blame game will soon start. So it is important to make sure that the self-serving spin game that accompanied the game of those who happily ignored since last summer the looming housing, mortgage and economic mess will not be repeated again. Powerful political and financial interests will spin their self-serving ideological spin on who is to blame for this mess. Specifically be ready for a cabal of supply side voodoo ideologues - from the Wall Street Journal editorial page (and its invited op-ed writers) to hacks (calling them economists would be an insult to my profession) such as Arthur Laffer, Steve Hanke and other assorted voodoo religion priests - to start spinning a tale blaming government regulation and interference for this disaster that has instead its core in the lack of sensible government regulation, not the existence of such regulation. In the meanwhile powerful financial interests that repeat the mantra – or better the proof-less dogma - of unregulated free markets and do not like any – even sensible – supervision and regulation of the financial system will happily blame government action – rather than their own reckless greed and stupidity - for this disaster while happily demanding and receiving billions in bailout funds from the same government that they so happily disdain. This will be the most appalling form of corporate welfare: privatize the profits in good times and socialize the losses in bad times. This fairy tale spinned by free market supply side voodoo fundamentalism zealots will blame the otherwise appropriate current Congressional action on predatory lending for being one of the main causes of the credit crunch that will lead to a painful recession (as the WSJ editorial page recently claimed) while forgetting that predatory lending practices developed by free unregulated markets created the toxic waste that is subprime and near-prime mortgages.. This voodoo religion cabal will also incorrectly blame regulators – whose true blame was being asleep at the wheel for six years while being drugged by a philosophy of “laissez-faire” non-interference with free markets while this free market garbage was being originated – for now finally starting to crack down on monstrous “free market” practices such as zero downpayments on mortgages or NINJA (No Income, No Jobs and Assets) loans; this cabal will thus now blame regulators for “destroying” the sub-prime and near-prime mortgage market with their intervention into “self-regulating free markets”. The same voodoo economics religion priests has and will incorrectly blame the “easy” Fed monetary policy – rather than the lack of any sensible regulation of credit and mortgage market lending – for creating the housing bubble and letting it fester for too long. It will also incorrectly blame the GSEs for creating “moral hazard” via guarantees of mortgages and thus causing this mess when, instead, the GSEs largely got out of the subprime business in the last few years - and let the free market flourish to originate this toxic waste – when politicians and policy makers started to bash the GSEs for their “excessive” role in the mortgage market. Since a lot of nonsense and financially self-interested ideological spin will be written and said in the months and years to come it is important – from the beginning – to be clear about who is at fault for this utter housing and financial disaster. The answer is clear: the blame lies with free market zealot and fanatics and voodoo economics ideologues who captured US economic policy in the last six years in the same way in which a bunch of neo-cons high-jacked US foreign policy to bring “democracy” to the Middle East while instead leading the country into the Iraq and Mid-East quagmire and now disaster. According to these ideologues – listen for example Larry Kudlow extolling every evening on CNBC the virtue of unregulated wild-west cowboy capitalism - government is always utter evil and the economy could never have a financial or economic crisis if taxes are low, government spending is minimal and government intervention and regulation of the economy and of financial systems is inexistent. This nonsense about bubbles, financial crises and recessions being impossible unless the government over-regulates the economy and/or makes monetary policy mistakes is the main religious dogma of this cabal, an axis of ideological zealotry that goes from the WSJ editorial page to a gang of voodoo economic hacks and to some segments of the financial television. The truth is the contrary: unregulated free market capitalism that has no sensible rules, regulation and supervision and sensible countercyclical monetary and fiscal policies of financial markets leads to credit and asset bubbles, financial excesses and economic and financial crashes. Economic and financial booms and busts were much more severe in the US in the 19th when there was no central bank and no welfare state fiscal actor trying to fine tune the economic business cycle. And business cycle swings have become less frequent since Keynesian countercyclical use of monetary and fiscal policy has been introduced from the Great Depression on. The reality of the last three US recessions – the 1990 recession, the 2001 recession and the coming 2007 hard landing – is that each of these recessions started when the government stopped regulating and supervising in moderate and sensible ways financial institutions and allowed credit and financial and investment bubbles to rise and fester until they ended up in bursting bubbles and leading to recessions. Take the latest subprime and mortgage disaster: the WSJ editorial page will certainly in due time blame the coming recession (that it now happens to predict as likely) on Congress meddling with markets on predatory lending, on excessive regulation of what financial institutions do and on the moral hazard evils of expected bailouts of mortgage lenders and borrowers. But this argument is confusing totally cause and effect. The housing and mortgage and subprime bubble and bust did not occur because of government interference and regulation of free markets. It did instead occur because government regulators were asleep at the wheel while a bunch of voodoo priests of laissez-faire capitalism were running US economic policy and let the housing and mortgage bubble fester. Blaming the now too late government crackdown on free market mortgage practices that were utterly reckless for the final bust and crash is like blaming the doctor for imposing bitter medicine to cure the disease of a reckless patient who lived in a bubble and spent the last few years on a diet of booze, drugs and artery clogging junk food. This latest mortgage carnage did not happen because of excessive over-regulation of markets by the government: it happened instead because – blinded by the anti-regulation dogmas of a bunch of priests of a voodoo religion – the government and regulators did nothing to sensibly regulate the housing and mortgage market and thus allowed this cancer to grow and fester. Booms and busts are regular features of market economies that do not have sensible government supervision and regulation of financial and credit markets. The S&L crisis that led to the credit crunch that caused the 1990 recession started when previously regulated S&Ls were deregulated and there was no sensible supervision of their activities while deposit insurance led them to “gambling for redemption” reckless lending. And blaming “evil” government-provided deposit insurance for their moral hazard gambles is again confusing cause and effect: financial institution that do strictly need deposit insurance to avoid free-market capitalism liquidity and bank runs during panic episodes do require sensible government-imposed and monitored capital adequacy ratios as well as supervision and regulation of their lending activities to avoid moral hazard-induced distortions in their lending behavior. It is not government-generated moral hazard via insurance that lead to reckless gambling for redemption: it is the lack of sensible government-based regulation and supervision that leads to credit and asset bubbles. In the 1980s this deregulation of S&L then led to a real estate bubble – both in commercial and residential real estate in the South of the US – that ended up in a bust once a glut of shopping strips, shopping malls, office centers, and residential homes piled up as a result of unregulated credit creation by the S&L. Then, the ensuing credit crunch – rather than the necessary but late government intervention to control this free market made disaster – led to a painful recession in 1990-1991, a systemic banking crisis and a bailout of these S&Ls that ended up costing the US Treasury – or better the US taxpayer – about $200 billion. Unregulated wild-west capitalism without rules and regulations was the cause of the S&L boom and bust, not the eventual government intervention to deal with this mess as the priests of the free markets voodoo religion would want you to believe. Similarly, the last six years’ housing and subprime mortgage bubble and bust had little to do with excessive government intervention – either ex-ante or ex-post. Instead they had all to do with the lack of any basic sensible government regulation of the mortgage market, regulation in practice rather than in theory. Dozens of new subprime lenders emerged and were allowed to lend via monstrous credit practices – liar or NINJA loans, no down-payment loans, interest rate only loans, negative amortization loans, teaser rates, option ARMs with no limits or controls - that should have never been allowed in the first place. Even now that regulators are starting to crack down on the most patent monstrosities such as zero down-payment and no documentation of income, jobs and assets the voodoo priests and their acolytes in the mortgage industry are starting to blame the government for interfering with free market practices: in their ideological view there were optimal reasons for all of such practices: in market fundamentalism if such practices emerged there was a good reason for them and now the government interfering with these monstrosities will cause a credit crunch that will damage the mortgage market and cause a nasty credit crunch that will lead to an economy-wide recession. What a bunch of nonsense and self-interested baloney! These practices instead emerged because the voodoo free market system of financial incentives for lenders – deceive borrowers with predatory practices, originate reckless mortgages to pile up fees, then securitize those mortgages and shove them on some other investors who had no clue of which toxic waste they were buying – became a whole con scheme. The way a senior and unnamed market participant put it in a bit exaggerated terms this was “an unregulated scam where a bunch of con artists fooled a bunch of clueless deadbeat borrowers”. So do not blame excessive government regulation; it was the lack of any basic regulation that created the bubble. Do not blame Congress for being the cause of the coming credit crunch because of it totally appropriate predatory lending investigations and soon legislation. If such legislation will lead – as some recent analyses have suggested to the disappearance of one third of the subprime mortgage market, so be it as part of these subprime loans were deceptive, predatory and should have never been made in the first place. Lenders were systematically deceiving poor and uninformed borrowers, many of which minorities who had no clue of what they were getting into. Suppose you were a poor African American or Hispanic or a white poor with low income and no assets who wanted to pursue the American Dream of home ownership and you did not qualify for a regular mortgage because of your low income. No problem – told you the mortgage broker – we will give you a NINJA (no income, no job and assets) or liar loan, i.e. a loan with no documentation of your income and assets. You did not afford any down-payment because of little assets? No problem as we will let you to put zero down-payment so that you start with zero equity in your home. You could not afford principal payments? No problem as we will give you an interest only loan. You could not afford a fixed rate mortgage? We will give you a 2-28 ARM where the rate is fixed at low level for two years and then you move to much higher market rates. You did afford even that? We will give you a teaser rate for a little while. You could not afford even that? We will let you capitalize interest on a higher face value of the mortgage for a while so that you will have negative amortization and you pile up negative equity on your home from the very beginning. And the poor, hapless and clueless borrowers said yes to all of this as the lender never told him that after two years its debt servicing rate would balloon by 500% once he/she had to start paying high market rates and principal on an ever increasing –not decreasing – stock of mortgage debt. So do not blame Congress for necessary legislation on predatory lending for causing the current credit crunch; it was the lack of such legislation in the first place that allowed millions of mortgages that should have not been originated in the first place to mushroom without control. Also, did the originators care or had any interest or incentive to warn the borrower that he/she could not afford such predatory and deceptive mortgages? No way as the originator would get very fat originations fees/commissions. then package this toxic waste into mortgage backed securities, get a nice rating on that garbage from oligopolistic credit rating agencies whose income derived from giving a high rating to this junk – under the pretense that tens of thousands of piles of toxic waste would turn by miracle into gourmet food – and then sell this securitized toxic junk as if it was fresh roses to even more clueless “savvy” investors desperately searching for yield and being dumbly ignorant of the risks that they were taking. These investors were not innocent victims; they were blinded by their own search-for-yield greed and did not bother to figure out non-transparent and totally opaque new financial instruments may be toxic waste. Then this entire housing and mortgage and securitization bubble fed an entire industry of originators, brokers, banks, broker dealers who created and securitized this junk and created CDOs, synthetic CDOs, CDOs of CDOs (CDO squared) , CDOs of CDOs of CDOs (CDOs cubed) and another totally not-transparent fog of credit derivatives – that were being priced based on intuition rather than true analysis of risk. These credit derivatives went, in less than a decade, from non-existent to a notional value of over $26 trillion. In the meanwhile this industry sold this garbage and provided financing for these investments as well as a variety of other prime broker services to a rising mountain of thousands of hedge funds. The fortunes of some of these broker dealers were partly fed for a decade from lending to home builders, to subprime originators or originating the mortgages themselves, securitizing the mortgages into RMBS, creating and managing the CDOs (and all their endless synthetic and cubed variants of them), offering aggressive prime brokerage services to the hedge funds buying this toxic waste, as well as trading on their own accounts the variety of these new instruments. No wonder these broker dealers and large financial institutions stocks are now under pressure while their arguments that they are only marginally directly exposed to subprime sound so lame: they are directly and indirectly exposed to this toxic waste via a dozen of different channels. Also, please do not blame the GSEs (Fannie and Freddie) for this mess even if the GSE do have very different problems that need to be addressed. The GSEs were bashed for years by Greenspan, Treasury, Bernanke and a wide variety of observers for their excessive size and role in the mortgage market (securitization and guarantees of mortgages), for how they were managing their risks and for the potential moral hazard deriving from an alleged implicit bailout guarantee that allowed them to borrow at quasi-sovereign rates. Indeed some of these critiques of the GSEs do have some merit. But the paradoxical effect of the backlash against the GSEs has been that in the last few years these institutions have significantly reduced their role in securitizing and guaranteeing mortgages. Specifically Fannie and Fannie significantly reduced their presence in the MBS market, especially among subprime mortgages and the MBS related to them. Reacting to the persistent arguments from many fronts that the two GSEs should reduce their role in the MBS market, in the last few years the job of originating and securitizing subprime mortgages and many near-prime mortgages was mostly taken over by private sectors institutions. As the GSEs got out of this business, subprime lenders and other major financial institutions originated sub-prime and near-prime mortgages, repackaged them and securitized into MBS then sold to investors and to CDOs. So, the growth of subprime and near-prime toxic waste had little or nothing to do with the role of the GSE in the mortgage market. Fannie and Freddie may have many faults but this subprime disaster is certainly not one of them. So beware of misleading attempts to blame the GSEs and moral hazard distortions from their perceived semi-public status in contributing to this subprime and mortgage disaster. The paradox is instead the fact that pulling the GSEs from any role in the subprime market allowed the “free market” to develop the excesses and monstrosities that the rise of subprime and near-prime mortgages generated in the last six years. It was the absence of the GSEs from this market, not their presence that contributed to this mess; and it was the presence of an unregulated free market system that allowed this monstrous bubble to be created, to be allowed to fester and to now burst with the nasty collateral damage that is coming with it. Given the total lack of a role of the GSEs in this subprime and near-prime disaster it is really paradoxical that Bernanke, in his speech last week about the GSEs, pushed for reducing further their financial portfolios and recommended that the main role that they should have from now on should be the one of help support “affordable housing”, i.e. originating or underwriting and securitizing subprime mortgages. After years of ideological battles against them and after they moved out of the subprime market, and after the unregulated free market was allowed to develop the subprime market and create the toxic disaster whose collateral damage will now be paid by the US taxpayer Bernanke is now telling us that the subprime mortgage business (“affordable housing”) should not be managed by the private sector but should instead be fully given to the GSEs. He formally fudged the proposal by saying that greater role of GSEs in affordable housing finance does not mean a greater role in the subprime market. But he contradicted himself: having GSEs having a center role in affordable housing means a central role in securitizing subprime mortgages. This is the same ideology that led to the subprime disaster in the first place: privatize the profits of greed and unregulated gambling for redemption; and socialize the costs and losses when disaster from free market fundamentalism occurs. This is outright corporate welfare chutzpah. Also, it is now clear that making subprime loans is clearly not an economically rational business for the private sector given the current subprime disaster. However whether Fannie and Freddie should do it instead or not is not obvious. If there is a role for the government in this markt then one may want to tax those who can afford to finance the subsidies for affordable housing. So Bernanke wants to reduce the GSE's interference with free markets by giving them and the public sector a greater role in affordable housing. But if the GSE have to do - and be perceived as doing - business as private sector firms that do not benefit from moral hazard related government how can they subsidize affordable housing and make a profit? If they get a role in affordable housing effectively Bernanke is telling us that they are public institutions, not private ones. So implicitly Bernanke is undermining all his attempts and those of others to make the GSEs truly private institutions that are not perceived as being protected by a Treasury bailout guarantee. The same free market fundamentalist zealots – at the WSJ editorial page, among voodoo economics hacks and among the policy makers that mis-managed US economic policy for the last few years – who bashed the GSEs were also pushing the other mantra of the benefits for growth of low taxation of capital. But take housing. The taxation of investment in housing – an effectively unproductive form of capital - not only is not heavy; it is rather tax-preferred relative to other productive forms of capital. The zealots who want low taxation of capital got it all in the tax-favorite status of housing investment by households. The result has been another monstrosity: a decade of massive overinvestment by the US in one of the most unproductive forms of capital, housing. This overinvestment fed by low taxation of housing investment has led to large current account deficits - via the increase in housing investment and the fall in private savings that the housing wealth effect had on consumption - and to the accumulation of trillions of foreign liabilities. So instead on increasing its stock of productive physical capital the US has spent a decade piling up trillions of dollars of investment in unproductive housing capital that has no effects on the rate of productivity of the economy. The rest of the world spent the last decade investing in factories that produce world class, high-quality and low costs goods; the US invested in McMansions that have zero productivity value and spillovers for the economy. Again thank the free market fundamentalist zealots who love no regulation and little taxation of capital for this sorry state. The same free market zealots have now started to blame the Fed for causing the housing bubble. In their view the Fed, by aggressively easing rates after 2001 and keeping the Fed Funds rates too low for too long, created the housing bubble that is now bursting. So they blame the Fed for a disaster that had its source in the private sector behavior and actions. The same free marketers argue that the Fed created the tech bubble that burst in 2000 and led to the 2001 recession. But while easy Fed policy had some role in the three private sector bubbles of the last two decades that ended up in a recession bust - late 1980s real estate bubble that led to S&L bust and 1990s recession, the late 1990s tech bubble that led to the 2000 tech bust and the 2001 recession, the 2000s housing bubble that led to the housing bust of 2006 and the coming recession of 2007 – the center of the problem in each one of these three booms and busts was not – as voodoo religion hacks and zealots spin it now - excessively easy monetary policy by the Fed but rather proper regulation of financial and credit markets. The center cause of these disasters was the lack of appropriate regulation of free markets. First, in the 1980s S&L were deregulated and wild-west capitalism became the norm of the credit policies of the S&Ls in the South and South-West of the US: then, a bunch of greedy cowboys and at time criminal con artists high-jacked the credit policies of the S&Ls and triggered a private sector real estate boom that, like today, created a massive amount of toxic waste in real estate. This toxic garbage then exploded in the late 1980s in a nasty bust that triggered a credit crunch that was the main cause of the 1990-91 recession. Second, in the 1990s, the attempt to avoid the liquidity run and crunch caused by another unregulated private sector-related reckless leverage – the near collapse of LTCM and its collateral damage – induced the Fed to ease the Fed Funds rate by 75bps in the fall of 1998 and let the tech sector “irrational exuberance” - that Greenspan had already identified in 1996 - to fester even longer. But higher Fed Funds rates would have not stopped this private sector crazed mania. What was necessary then was again better regulation of the financial system: much tighter margin requirements on leveraged stock market investments; control of leverage in the financial system and among highly leveraged institutions such as hedge funds. Failure to implement sensible regulation – such as margin requirements on leveraged tech investments - allowed the tech bubble to fester, then go bust in 2000-2001 and cause a painful recession in 2001 . Third, this time around it is not true – like the WSJ editorial page has repeatedly and wrongly argued – that the housing bubble was mostly caused by a Fed that kept the Fed Funds rate too low for too long. Higher interest rates sooner would have made only little difference, especially in a world where long rates and mortgage rates depended more on global factors - that kept such rates low - rather than on monetary policy. The central Fed failure was not that of keeping the Fed Funds rate too low for too long (that was only a modest misdemeanor) but rather its failure (as well as that of other banking regulators) to control the credit bubble in the housing market via appropriate supervision and regulation of mortgage finance and via prevention of monster lending practices. Greenspan allowed the tech bubble to fester by first warning about irrational exuberance and then doing nothing about via either monetary policy or, better, proper regulation of the financial system while at the same time becoming the “cheerleader of the new economy”. And Greenspan/Bernanke allowed the housing bubble to develop in three ways of increasing importance: first, easy Fed Funds policy (but this was a minor role); second, being asleep at the wheel (together with all the banking regulators) in regulating housing lending; third, by becoming the cheerleaders of the monstrosities that were going under the name of “financial innovations” of housing finance. Specifically, Greenspan explicitly supported in public speeches the development and growth of the risky option ARMs and other exotic mortgage innovations that allowed the subprime and near-prime toxic waste to mushroom. In a world where the leading ideology was to reduce regulation to a minimum, not only closing one’s eyes on monster lending practices but rather actively praising them as brilliant financial innovations, bashing GSEs in the name of letting the superior private sector to take a bigger role in monster housing finance, it is not a surprise that the biggest bubble in U.S. history was created, incentivated and allowed to fester until it imploded. Free market fundamentalist zealotry that did not understand that market capitalism needs some basic and sensible rules, regulation and supervision to control excesses, bubbles, greed and investors’ manias and panics. The political neo-con freedom and liberty fundamentalists deluded themselves that free elections and military invasions will automatically lead to democracy in the Middle East. Instead, their free elections and freedom-agenda ended up getting Hamas, Hizbollah and Shite fanatics to come to power in Gaza, Lebanon and Iraq and while destabilizing Iraq and soon a good chunk of Middle-East. In the same way the free market fundamentalism zealots deluded themselves that unregulated free markets and low taxes could never do anything wrong or harm. Too bad that unregulated free markets that systematically lead – as two hundred years of US economic history show - to bubbles that end up in busts and nasty recessions have been the source of the last two US recessions. The implementation of this ideology is also the source of the latest housing boom and bust that is already leading to a severe credit crunch in the mortgage market and that will lead to an economy-wide recession in 2007 that will be deeper and more painful than those in 1990 and 2001. So it was a vast range of dogmas and free market fundamentalism pushed by a bunch of ideological zealots - that were handmaiden to financial interests that enjoy private profits in good times and corporate welfare paid by the US taxpayer when their free market greed and excesses lead to nasty financial busts - that created this disaster. It was not an evil, large and over-regulating government that created this disaster. It was instead an ideology and practice of unregulated free markets that fed this mess. Now that the mess has occurred and the financial costs of widespread bankruptcies among borrowers and lenders will be severe the issue will be the one of how to clean up this mess by helping the true victims while not bailing out the true culprits. The main challenge will be to help the victims of this disaster – those households that were duped into predatory mortgages and who are now unable to service their resetting ARMs – without bailing out the private “free market” institutions that created this mess in the first place. Market capitalism works if equity holders first and bondholders second take the losses of their own investment mistakes. So wide-scale public bail-out of financial institutions should be strictly avoided and minimized. The trouble is that when deposit-taking institutions fail because their net worth is negative (as a consequence of bad lending) deposit insurance limits the losses that can be inflicted on these effectively senior creditors of these banks. Thus first losses should be taken by shareholders and other unsecured bondholders and creditors of the banks. In the case of the subprime lenders until now the failures have been concentrated among institutions that relied on capital markets for funding, rather than on insured bank deposits. Thus losses can and should be allocated to owners and bondholders of these institutions with no use of public money to bailout anyone. However, we cannot exclude that in due time some commercial banks and other deposit-taking institutions will get into trouble and public money may be needed to clean up the balance sheets of such institutions. Public funds to help borrowers should be used with care for several reasons. First, some forms of borrowers’ financial support end up bailing out also the culprits of this mess; thus, these specific forms of support of homeowners under financial distress should be avoided. For example, direct subsidies to households who cannot afford their now-reset and excessively high mortgage payments end up helping the victims as well as the culprits. Thus, this kind of support should be avoided. Second, across the board support of all sub-prime borrowers would be inappropriate: while many borrowers were duped into predatory mortgages by lenders who did not explain to them what were the true terms of these loans, a minority of borrowers recklessly borrowed well knowing they could not afford the terms of the mortgage. They borrowed either gambling into capital gains that never occurred (speculative investment in homes) or planning strategic early default on their mortgage. The latter phenomenon is represented by the epidemic of early payments defaults that we have seem among some subprime mortgages: given the time that it takes to foreclose a home some borrowers intentionally took mortgages that they were not planning to service at all to enjoy the benefits of a few months of free rent of a home. However, these few deadbeat borrowers were able to dupe lenders because underwriting standards of originators were recklessly loose to begin with: anyone lying about their income, job and asset could get a mortgage. The analysis above suggests some principles for the coming financial support that will be given with public funds to clean up the unfolding mortgage disaster. First, distinguish between true victims of predatory lending and deadbeat borrowers who were into early strategic default. Early payments default is a clear way to distinguish between inability to pay and unwillingness to pay. Also, means testing for financial support is crucial: low income and low asset households who were pursuing the American Dream and were deceived by lenders may deserve support. But subprime borrowers with higher incomes and/or assets do not deserve support and should be pushed into foreclosure if they are unable or unwilling to service their mortgages. Also, condo-flippers and other individuals who bought homes for speculative purposes such as speculating on price increases (i.e. folks who were not first time homeowners who lived in their homes) would get no financial relief at all and will be forced to foreclose if they are unable or unwilling to service their mortgage. Second, financial support to households who were victims of predatory lending (and owners of overvalued homes whose value was incorrectly assessed as much higher than equilibrium) should take the form of reduced debt servicing (as in some recent proposals) rather than subsidies to borrowers; this to prevent the support of the borrowing victims from indirectly bailing out the culprits of reckless or predatory lending. For example, suppose that the value of a home (with zero down-payment) has fallen 10% (following the current housing bust) and that the borrower cannot now pay the full value of the mortgage debt servicing payments that are now being reset at much higher interest rates. Then, if the borrower can afford a lower string of service payments that, in NPV terms, is 10% lower than the initial terms of the mortgage (and equal to the true value of the home), the solution will be to allow a reduction of 10% (in NPV terms) of the debt-servicing payments for the borrower. Instead, a public subsidy to the borrower in the same amount would have the same effect on the borrower while bailing out a reckless or predatory lender. Suppose instead that the home value has fallen 10% but the household cannot afford even a 10% NPV reduction of the stream of debt payments associated with the initial mortgage (say at zero initial down-payment). Then, the household – duped or not – was buying a home with a bundle of housing services that was too large relative to its ability to afford it even after the value of the mortgage has been adjusted to the lower market value of the home. In this case if it takes more than a 10% reduction in the NPV of the debt payments to allow the household to be able (or equivalently willing) to afford the home. Thus, it make sense to foreclose the home and not provide financial support to the household: duped or not the household had bought a home whose real housing services were too large relative to even its ability to afford it at a reduced market value. Thus, financial support of the household is not warranted and foreclosure is a socially efficient solution. The bank should take the loss of a mortgage with a home value lower than the mortgage. And such household should rent a lower amount of housing services by renting a smaller home/apartment rather than own a home with a bundle of housing services that it cannot afford. Finally, if deposit-taking institutions whose depositors benefit of deposit insurance go bankrupt (have negative net worth) because of housing related losses, equity holders should be wiped out first and unsecured bondholders should suffer next before any public funds are used to recapitalize and fiscalize the losses of the bank. This simple principle would minimize the fiscal costs of cleaning up distressed banks while minimizing the moral hazard distortions of deposit insurance. In summary, lack of sensible supervision and regulation of banks, mortgage lenders and other financial institution – partly induced by an ideology of free market fundamentalism – has been the core cause of this private sector created disaster, not excesses of regulation or of government policy. Thus, to minimize the fiscal costs of cleaning up this mess, use of public funds should be carefully managed and targeted to help the true victims of this mess – borrowers duped by predatory lending practices – while avoiding any bail-out of the culprits of this mess. Privatizing profits in good times while socializing losses in bad times is another form of reckless corporate welfare that generates moral hazard while fostering new bubbles. Ideological supply side voodoo zealots should not be allowed to spin a tale where evil government intervention caused this disaster. And the private sector institutions and investors that indulged in this unregulated reckless behavior should take their losses. Market economies are the best economic system but they work properly when private greed, manias, panics, stupidity and recklessness is tempered by sensible supervision and regulation. And may the unfolding mortgage disaster bury once and for all the neo-con supply side voodoo economics religion of unregulated free markets fundamentalism. You do not have sufficent permission to access the rest of this posting. To find out how to access Premium Contnet like this, click here

Comments Post A Comment By posting a comment to this blog, you are agreeing to the RGE Monitor Web Logs Terms of Use below.



RGE Monitor Web Logs Terms of Use ("Terms of Use") This page states the "RGE Monitor Web Log Terms of Use" under which You may use all RGE Monitor Web Logs (RGE Blog Sites), an online service to post and search ideas on global macro and geostrategic information, an online community designed to facilitate valuable professional and personal networking among its users based on common experiences and interests ("RGEMonitor.com" or "Web Site"). These Terms of Use include the RGE Privacy Policy, the RGE Monitor Terms of Use and the RGE Premium Fee Policy, each of which is incorporated into these Terms of Use by reference. By using Rgemonitor.com, You are indicating your agreement to these Terms of Use, including the RGE Privacy Statement. This is a Web log reflecting the opinions of its author. It is unaffiliated with any NASD broker/dealer. Statements on this site do not represent the views or policies of anyone other than the author and contributors. The information on this site is provided for discussion purposes only, and is not investing recommendation. Under no circumstances does this information represent a recommendation to buy or sell securities. Please read these terms in their entirety. If You do not accept the Terms of Use stated here, do not use the RGE Monitor.com, RGE Blog Sites and the services. By using Rgemonitor.com, You are indicating your acceptance to be bound by the provisions of these Terms of Use. Roubini Global Economics, LLC ("RGE" or the "Company") may revise these Terms of Use at any time by updating this posting. You should visit this page periodically to review the Terms of Use, because they are binding on You. The terms "You" and "User" as used herein refer to all individuals and/or entities accessing this Web site for any reason. 1. Eligibility. You must be 18 years of age or older to visit or use Rgemonitor.com in any manner. By visiting Rgemonitor.com or accepting these Terms of Use, You represent and warrant to the Company that You are 18 years of age or older, and that You have the right, authority and capacity to agree to and abide by these Terms of Use. You also represent and warrant to the Company that You will use Rgemonitor.com in a manner consistent with any and all applicable laws and regulations. 2. Use of RGE Content. The Company authorizes You to view and access a single copy of the content available on or from Rgemonitor.com Web logs solely for your personal use. The contents of Rgemonitor.com, and of all other Web sites under the Company's control, whether partial or otherwise (Rgemonitor.com and such other Web sites are sometimes collectively referred to as "RGE Sites") such as text, graphics, images, logos, button icons, software and other RGE Content (collectively, "RGE Content"), are protected under both United States and foreign copyright, trademark and other laws. All RGE Content is the property of the Company or its content suppliers or clients. The compilation (meaning the collection, arrangement and assembly) of all content on the RGE Blog Sites are the exclusive property of the Company and protected by U.S. and international copyright laws. Unauthorized use of the RGE Content may violate copyright, trademark, and other laws. You must retain all copyright, trademark, servicemark and other proprietary notices contained in the original RGE Content on any copy You make of the RGE Content. You may not sell or modify the RGE Content or reproduce, display, publicly perform, distribute, or otherwise use the RGE Content in any way for any public or commercial purpose. The use of the RGE Content on any other Web site or in a networked computer environment for any purpose is prohibited. You shall not copy or adapt the HTML code that the Company creates to generate any RGE Content or the pages making up any RGE Site which is also protected by the Company's copyright. 3. RGE Blog Restrictions. Users may not use any RGE Site in order to transmit, distribute, store or destroy material, including without limitation RGE Content, (a) in violation of any applicable law or regulation, (b) in a manner that will infringe the copyright, trademark, trade secret or other intellectual property rights of others or violate the privacy, publicity or other personal rights of others, or (c) that is defamatory, obscene, threatening, abusive or hateful. Users are also prohibited from violating or attempting to violate the security of any RGE Web logs and the RGE Site, including, without limitation the following activities: (a) accessing data not intended for such user or logging into a server or account which the user is not authorized to access; (b) attempting to probe, scan or test the vulnerability of a system or network or to breach security or authentication measures without proper authorization; (c) attempting to interfere with service to any user, host or network, including, without limitation, via means of submitting a virus to any RGE Site, overloading, "flooding", "spamming", "mailbombing" or "crashing"; or (d) forging any TCP/IP packet header or any part of the header information in any e-mail or newsgroup posting. Violations of system or network security may result in civil or criminal liability. The Company will investigate occurrences which may involve such violations and may involve, and cooperate with, law enforcement authorities in prosecuting users who are involved in such violations. 4. Specific Prohibited Uses and Editorial Approval RGE Web Logs and the Rgemonitor.com Site may be used only for lawful purposes by individuals seeking to view and post commentary related to Global Macro Economics and Geostrategic information. The Company specifically prohibits any other use of Rgemonitor.com, and all Users agree not to do any of the following: (a) post any jobs on any RGE Site or other content that contains links to any site competitive with RGE; (b) post content on any RGE Site that contains any hyperlinks, "hidden" keywords or any keywords that are irrelevant to the themes posted on the blog. (c) send unsolicited mail or e-mail, making unsolicited phone calls or send unsolicited faxes regarding promotions and/or advertising of products or services to a user of any RGE Site; (d) delete or revise any material posted by any other person or entity; (e) take any action that imposes an unreasonable or disproportionately large load on any RGE Site's infrastructure; (f) notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, use or attempt to use any engine, software, tool, agent or other device or mechanism (including without limitation browsers, spiders, robots, avatars or intelligent agents) to navigate or search any RGE Site other than the search engine and search agents available from the Company on such RGE Site and other than generally available third party Web browsers (e.g., Netscape Navigator, Microsoft Internet Explorer); (g) attempt to decipher, decompile, disassemble or reverse engineer any of the software comprising or in any way making up a part of any RGE Site; (h) aggregate, copy or duplicate in any manner any of the RGE Content or information available from any RGE Site; or (i) frame or link to any of RGE Content or information available from any RGE Site. 5. Web Log Registration Information. When You register with any RGE Web log, You will be asked to provide the Company with certain information including, without limitation, a valid e-mail address (your "Information"). In addition to the Terms of Use and any privacy policy applicable to any RGE Web Site, You understand and agree that the Company may disclose to third parties, on an anonymous basis, certain aggregate information contained in your registration application. The Company will not disclose to any third party your name, address, e-mail address or telephone number without your prior consent, except to the extent necessary or appropriate to comply with applicable laws or in legal proceedings where such information is relevant. Without limiting any of the other disclaimers of warranty set forth in these Terms of Use, RGE does not provide or make any representation as to the quality or nature of any of the third party products or services purchased through the Rgemonitor.com or any other RGE Site, or any other representation, warranty or guaranty. Any such undertaking, representation, warranty or guarantee would be furnished solely by the provider of the applicable class, or learning material, product or service, under the terms agreed to by the provider. 6. User Content and Submissions. You are solely responsible for your RGE registration and account information, content, messages or other information ("User Content") that You submit, publish or display (herein after, "post") on any RGE Site or transmit to other Users. By posting User Content to any RGE Site, You automatically grant, and You represent and warrant that You have the right to grant, to RGE an irrevocable, perpetual, non-exclusive, fully paid, worldwide license to use, copy, perform, display, and distribute such User Content and to prepare derivative works of, or incorporate into other works, such User Content, and to grant and authorize sublicenses thereof. By posting User Content to any public or non-public area of any RGE Site, including message boards and forums, You grant the Company and its affiliates the royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable, sublicenseable (through multiple tiers), non-exclusive right (including any moral rights) and license to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, translate, create derivative works from, distribute, communicate to the public, perform and display the User Content (in whole or in part) worldwide and/or to incorporate it in other works in any form, media, or technology now known or later developed, for the full term of any rights that may exist in such content. You also warrant that the holder of any rights, including moral rights in such content, has completely and effectively waived all such rights and validly and irrevocably granted to You the right to grant the license stated above. You also permit any User to access, display, view, store and reproduce such User Content for personal use. Subject to the foregoing, the owner of such User Content placed any RGE Site retains any and all rights that may exist in such User Content. The Company acts as a passive conduit for the online distribution and publication of User Content and has no obligation to screen communications or information in advance and is not responsible for screening or monitoring User Content posted by Users. However, the Company may review and delete any User Content that, in the sole judgment of RGE, violates these Terms of Use, violates applicable law, rule or regulation, is offensive or illegal or violates the rights of, harms or threatens the safety of Users of any RGE Site. The Company reserves the right to expel Users and prevent their further access to the RGE Blog Sites for violating the Terms of Use or applicable law, rule or regulation and the right to remove User Content which is in violation of the Terms of Use, abusive, illegal, or disruptive. The Company may take any action with respect to User Content that it deems necessary or appropriate in its sole discretion if it believes it may create liability for the Company or may cause the Company to lose (in whole or in part) the services of its ISPs or other suppliers. The following is a partial list of User Content that is prohibited on the RGE Blog Sites. The list below is for illustration only and is not a complete list of all prohibited User Content: - is implicitly or explicitly offensive, such as User Content that engages in, endorses or promotes racism, bigotry, hatred or physical harm of any kind against any group or individual; - harasses, incites harassment or advocates harassment of another any group or individual; - involves the transmission of "junk mail", "chain letters," or unsolicited mass mailing or "spamming"; - promotes or endorses false or misleading information or illegal activities or conduct that is abusive, threatening, obscene, defamatory or libelous; - promotes or endorses an illegal or unauthorized copy of another person's copyrighted work, such as providing or making available pirated computer programs or links to them, providing or making available information to circumvent manufacture-installed copy-protect devices, or providing or making available pirated music or other media or links to pirated music or other media files; - contains restricted or password only access pages, or hidden pages or images; - displays or links to pornographic, indecent or sexually explicit material of any kind; - provides or links to material that exploits people under the age of 18 in a sexual, violent or other manner, or solicits personal information from anyone under 18; or - provides instructional information about illegal activities or other activities prohibited by these Terms, including without limitation, making or buying illegal weapons, violating someone's privacy, or provides or creates computer viruses or pirating any media; and solicits passwords or personal identifying information from other Users; It is also a violation of the Terms of Use, to include in any User Content submitted to RGE Monitor that may be interpreted as direct solicitation, advertisement or recruitment for an available job position directed to individuals seeking employment on either a full time or part time basis. In order to protect our RGE Monitor Users from unauthorized commercial advertising or solicitation, RGE reserves the right to restrict the number of Comments a user may send in a 24 hour period to a number which RGE deems appropriate in its sole discretion. RGE reserves the right in its sole discretion to investigate and take legal action against anyone who engages in any illegal or prohibited conduct or otherwise violates these Terms of Use, including without limitation, removing the User Content from the RGE Blog Sites and/or terminating the offending User's ability to access the RGE Blog Sites and/or use RGE services. The Company may take any other action with respect to User Content or User actions that it deems necessary or appropriate in its sole discretion if it believes it may create liability for the Company or may cause the Company to lose (in whole or in part) the services of its ISPs or other suppliers. The Company does not represent or guarantee the truthfulness, accuracy, or reliability of User Content or any other communications posted by Users or endorse any opinions expressed by Users. You acknowledge that any reliance on material posted by other Users will be at your own risk. The Company has no obligation to screen User Content in advance and is not responsible for screening or monitoring User Content posted by Users. If notified by a User of communications which allegedly do not conform to these Terms of Use, the Company may in its sole discretion investigate the allegation and determine whether to take any other actions whether to remove or request the removal of the User Content. The Company has no liability or responsibility to Users for performance or nonperformance of such activities. We appreciate hearing from our Users and welcome your comments regarding our services and the RGE Monitor Site. Please be advised, however, that our policy does not permit us to accept or consider creative ideas, suggestions, inventions or materials other than those which we have specifically requested. While we do value your feedback on our services, please be specific in your comments regarding our services and do not submit creative ideas, inventions, suggestions, or materials. If, despite our request, You send us creative suggestions, ideas, drawings, concepts, inventions, or other information (collectively the "Submission"), the Submission shall be the property of the Company. None of the Submission shall be subject to any obligation of confidentiality on our part and we shall not be liable for any use or disclosure of any Submission. The Company shall own exclusively all now known or later discovered rights to the Submission and shall be entitled to unrestricted use of the Submission for any purpose whatsoever, commercial or otherwise, without compensation to You or any other person who submitted the Submission. 7. Registration and Password. You are responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of your RGE Account, RGE Registration, passwords, and if You are a RGE Subscriber, your Billing Account. You shall be responsible for all uses of your Web Site registrations and passwords, whether or not authorized by You. You agree to immediately notify the Company of any unauthorized use of your RGE Account. 8. The Company's Liability. Rgemonitor.com acts as an information service that aggregated global macro economic and geostrategic information. The Company is not involved in the actual transactions based on the content posted on the RGE Site. As a result, the Company has no control over the quality, safety or legality of the linked content. Because user authentication on the Internet is difficult, the Company cannot and does not confirm that each User is who they claim to be. Because we do not and cannot be involved in user-to-user dealings or control the behavior of participants on any RGE Site, in the event that You have a dispute with one or more Users, You release the Company (and our agents and employees) from claims, demands and damages (actual and consequential, direct and indirect) of every kind and nature, known and unknown, suspected and unsuspected, disclosed and undisclosed, arising out of or in any way connected with such disputes. If You are a California resident, You waive California Civil Code d1542, which says: "A general release does not extend to claims which the creditor does not know or suspect to exist in his favor at the time of executing the release, which if known by him must have materially affected his settlement with the debtor." The RGE Blog Sites and the RGE Content may contain inaccuracies or typographical errors. The Company makes no representations about the accuracy, reliability, completeness, or timeliness of any RGE Site or the RGE Content. The use of all RGE Blog Sites and the RGE Content is at your own risk. Changes are periodically made to RGE Blog Sites and may be made at any time. You acknowledge and agree that You are solely responsible for the form, content and accuracy of any material contained therein placed by You on the RGE Blog Sites. Employers are solely responsible for their postings on RGE Blog Sites. The Company is not to be considered to be an employer with respect to your use of any RGE Site. RGE cannot guarantee and does not promise any specific results from use of Rgemonitor.com or any RGE Site. No advice or information, whether oral or written, obtained by a User from RGE or through or from Rgemonitor.com or any other RGE Site shall create any warranty not expressly stated herein. 9. Disclaimer of Warranty. THE COMPANY DOES NOT WARRANT THAT ANY RGE SITE WILL OPERATE ERROR-FREE OR THAT ANY RGE SITE AND ITS SERVERS ARE FREE OF COMPUTER VIRUSES OR OTHER HARMFUL MECHANISMS. IF YOUR USE OF ANY RGE SITE OR THE RGE CONTENT RESULTS IN THE NEED FOR SERVICING OR REPLACING EQUIPMENT OR DATA, THE COMPANY IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR THOSE COSTS. THE RGE BLOG SITES AND RGE CONTENT ARE PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS WITHOUT ANY WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND. THE COMPANY, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING THE WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. THE COMPANY MAKES NO WARRANTIES ABOUT THE ACCURACY, RELIABILITY, COMPLETENESS, OR TIMELINESS OF THE RGE CONTENT, SERVICES, SOFTWARE, TEXT, GRAPHICS, AND LINKS. 10. Disclaimer of Consequential Damages. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COMPANY, ITS SUPPLIERS, OR ANY THIRD PARTIES MENTIONED ON ANY RGE SITE BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, INCIDENTAL AND CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, LOST PROFITS, OR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM LOST DATA OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) RESULTING FROM THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE ANY RGE SITE AND THE RGE CONTENT, WHETHER BASED ON WARRANTY, CONTRACT, TORT, OR ANY OTHER LEGAL THEORY, AND WHETHER OR NOT THE COMPANY IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. 11. Limitation of Liability. NEITHER ROUBINI GLOBAL ECONOMICS NOR ANY OF ITS MEMBERS, DIRECTORS, EMPLOYEES OR OTHER REPRESENTATIVES WILL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OF THIS SITE OR ANY INFORMATION, PRODUCTS OR SERVICES CONTAINED HEREIN, WHICH INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE MATERIALS, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF. THIS IS A COMPREHENSIVE LIMITATION OF LIABILITY THAT APPLIES TO ALL DAMAGES OF ANY KIND, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, INDIRECT, SPECIAL AND CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, LOSS OF DATA, INCOME, PROFIT OR GOODWILL, LOSS OF OR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY AND CLAIMS OF THIRD PARTIES. 12. Links to Other Sites. Rgemonitor.com and certain other RGE Blog Sites contain links to third party Web sites. These links are provided solely as a convenience to You and not as an endorsement by the Company of the contents on such third-party Web sites. The Company is not responsible for the content of linked third-party sites and does not make any representations regarding the content or accuracy of materials on such third party Web sites. If You decide to access linked third-party Web sites, You do so at your own risk. 13. No Resale or Unauthorized Commercial Use. You agree not to resell or assign your rights or obligations under these Terms of Use. You also agree not to make any unauthorized commercial use of any RGE Site. 14. Indemnity. You agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Company, its affiliates, and their respective officers, directors, employees and agents, from and against any claims, actions or demands, including without limitation reasonable legal and accounting fees, alleging or resulting from (i) any User Content or other material You provide to any RGE Site, (ii) your use of any RGE Content, or (iii) your breach of the terms of these Terms of Use. The Company shall provide notice to You promptly of any such claim, suit, or proceeding. 15. General. The Company makes no claims that the RGE Content may be lawfully viewed or accessed outside of the United States. Access to the RGE Content may not be legal by certain persons or in certain countries. If You access a Rgemonitor.com or other U.S.-based RGE Blog Sites from outside of the United States, You do so at your own risk and are responsible for compliance with the laws of your jurisdiction. These Terms of Use are governed by the internal substantive laws of the New York, without respect to its conflict of laws principles. Jurisdiction for any claims arising under this agreement shall lie exclusively with the State or Federal courts within New York. If any provision of these Terms of Use is found to be invalid by any court having competent jurisdiction, the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of these Terms of Use, which shall remain in full force and effect. No waiver of any term of these Terms of Use shall be deemed a further or continuing waiver of such term or any other term. Except as expressly provided in an additional agreement, additional terms of use for areas of Rgemonitor.com, a particular "Legal Notice," or License or material on particular Web pages, the Terms of Use and the Web Log Terms of Use constitute the entire agreement between You and the Company with respect to the use of Rgemonitor.com. No changes to these Terms of Use shall be made except by a revised posting on this page. 16. Additional Terms of Use. Certain areas of Rgemonitor.com and the other RGE Blog Sites are subject to additional terms of use. By using such areas, or any part thereof, You agree to be bound by the additional terms of use applicable to such areas. 17. Term and Termination These Terms of Use will remain in full force and effect while You are a User of Rgemonitor.com at any level. The Company reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to pursue all of its legal remedies, including but not limited to deletion of your User Content from Rgemonitor.com and the other RGE Blog Sites and immediate termination of your registration with or ability to access Rgemonitor.com and the other RGE Blog Sites and/or any other services provided to You by the Company, upon any breach by You of these Terms of Use or if the Company is unable to verify or authenticate any information You submit to Rgemonitor.com or other RGE Site registration. Even after You are no longer a User of Rgemonitor.com, certain provisions of these Terms of Use will remain in effect, including Sections 2, 6, 8(c), 11 through 22, inclusive. Document last modified on July 18, 2005



To help maintain the integrity of the conversation we ask that each user simply paste the keyword (below in red) into the confirmation field below. Sorry, but if you forget this step, your comments will not be saved!

