'); //--> E-Mail | E-Mail Newsletters | RSS

Thomson Financial News

Chicago Fed index indicates recession has probably begun UPDATE





(updates with details, analyst comment) WASHINGTON (Thomson Financial) - The Chicago Federal Reserve Bank's National Activity Index for February sent a signal that a recession has probably begun in the US. The February reading for the National Activity Index (NAI) fell to -1.04 from -0.68 in January, with all four broad categories in the index negative. It was the three-month moving average (MA3M) of the index which the Chicago Fed says created the recession signal. It was below the -0.70 'threshold' at -0.87 for February, and 'such an occurrence following a period of economic expansion indicates an increasing likelihood that a recession has begun,' the statement said. Worse still, downward revisions to previous data, especially employment, cut the previous two months below the -0.70 threshold as well, to -0.73 in January and -0.78 in December, making three consecutive months of recessionary indicators. 'Before revision, the index had only flirted with a recession signal but today's data are more convincing of an outright downturn' said economist Joeff Hall at Thomson IFR Markets. 'The MA3M was last this low in April 2003, consistent with recent performance of so many indicators. Heading into the 2001 recession, the MA3M had been -1.15 in March and it was 1.42 in November, the last business cycle trough.' The February three-month moving average also 'indicates low inflationary pressures from economic activity over the coming year.' The Chicago Fed's NAI is a weighted average of 85 national indicators of economic activity in four categories: production and income, employment, personal consumption and housing, and sales, orders and inventories. In February, the production indicators contributed -0.39 to the total index, compared with -0.12 in January. Employment indicators worsened to -0.36 from -0.27. Consumption and housing were marginally less negative at -0.22 from -0.24. Sales, orders and inventories were -0.08 last month, the Chicago Fed said. Sixty-five of the 85 national indicators were negative in February, and just 20 made positive contributions. dennis.moore@thomson.com+tfn.newsdesk@thomson.com dem/cmr/dem/wash/cmr COPYRIGHT Copyright Thomson Financial News Limited 2007. All rights reserved. The copying, republication or redistribution of Thomson Financial News Content, including by framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Thomson Financial News. Neither the Subscriber nor Thomson Financial News warrants the completeness or accuracy of the Service or the suitability of the Service as a trading aid and neither accepts any liability for losses howsoever incurred. The content on this site, including news, quotes, data and other information, is provided by Thomson Financial News and its third party content providers for your personal information only, and neither Thomson Financial News nor its third party content providers shall be liable for any errors, inaccuracies or delays in content, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon.

Read All Comments

More On This Topic

Article Controls

E-Mail | E-Mail Newsletters



del.icio.us | Digg It! | My Yahoo! | Share | RSS



Related Sections Home > News & Analysis





'); //--> News Headlines | More From Forbes.com | Special Reports Subscriptions >









