Via Mark Thoma, Economics of Contempt has done [did] a yeoman job [back in 2008] of assembling quotes from pundits/economists who insisted that there was no housing bubble. [At first I failed to note the date of EoC’s post; special kudos to Mark for remembering it and providing the link]. Just as a reminder, the facts:

Standard and Poors, Moody’s

EoC’s list consists largely of the usual suspects — the WSJ op-ed contributors/Kudlow guests. As he suggests, some of this was my fault: I said there was a housing bubble, which to them was sufficient demonstration that there wasn’t. (They hate me! They really hate me!) Beyond that, to suggest that there was a housing bubble was to denigrate the wonderful Bush Boom.

Can I add anything to Mr. Contempt’s list?

One question is whether you can find clear bubble denial, or at least denial that anything really bad was going to happen, from more respectable economists. Ben Bernanke is one well-known example; I’ve found this from Glenn Hubbard on Face the Nation, August 21, 2005:

I think we do have a great deal of froth in housing markets. There’s no doubt about it. I don’t think we’re likely to see a large nominal price collapse, that is largely falling house prices, but I think we’ll see much slower rates of growth in house prices after 2005.

Another phenomenon is the curious case of late bubble denial — economists insisting that there was no bubble well after the collapse was already underway. Here’s Alex Tabarrok, Feb. 13, 2008:

In the shift to the new equilibrium there was some mild overshooting, especially due to the subprime over expansion, but fundamentally there was no housing bubble [emphasis in the original].

And here’s Casey Mulligan, February 4, 2009:

I continue to watch the economy in 2009 but, barring a significant further decline in business activity, I do not expect to see a nationwide surplus of commercial real estate and therefore do not expect to see commercial real estate suffer the kind of crisis that followed from the housing surplus.

It’s possible to be a good, even great analytical economist and make terrible economic forecasts (see Fisher, Irving). But to the extent that economists are engaged in real-time analysis, the bubble provides an interesting case study.