Wiped off the map: The moment apocalyptic tsunami waves drown a sleepy coast town



This is the almost apocalyptic moment unstoppable tsunami waves wipe out an entire town after a massive earthquake struck off the coast of Japan today.

Hundreds of homes, workplaces and roads had lined the busy residential area of Rikuzentakata, on the north eastern coast.

A few hours earlier it would have been a typical Japanese town with hundreds of cars moving along the roads just before the evening rush hour.

Calm before the storm: The town of Rikuzentakata on the coast of north-eastern Japan looks like any other residential area but approaching in the distance is mist from the tsunami wave



Destruction: Buildings further inland shake as the wave moves swiftly across the land destroying almost anything in its path



Overwhelmed: The immensely powerful wave moves closer

But within seconds, the monstrous tsunami tidal wave gushes over rocks in the bay, bringing in its path a wall of water.



The wave reaches up to ten metres high, easily drowning homes that would have been full of people shortly before.

As the water sweeps past homes the entire region merges into the sea, causing a massive flood that few would have any chance of surviving.

Many of the homes are crushed beneath the intense pressure of the water which leaves behind a tangled mess of wrecked wooden homes.

In a scene resembling a floating city, other homes are carried away up to a mile inland as the wave wreaks havoc.

Any houses that stood firm against the first barrage of water were washed away when dozens more waves rolled in from the Pacific ocean.

Flattened: The town is swamped with deep water and the wreckage of homes that only hours earlier would have been full of life

Mess: The water leaves a trail of destruction with houses collapsed, cars are overturned and ships submerged



Damage: More than half of the home on the coast are wiped out as land is covered with a wall of water up to ten metres high

Similar scenes unfolded across the coasts of Japan, with hundreds of people killed as the tsunami swept away ships, cars and homes while widespread fires burned out of control.

Dozens of cities and villages along a 1,300-mile stretch of coastline were shaken by violent tremors that reached as far away as Tokyo, hundreds of miles from the epicentre.

Police said 200 to 300 bodies were found in the northeastern coastal city of Sendai, the city in Miyagi prefecture, or state, closest to the epicentre. Another 137 were confirmed killed, with 531 people missing. Police also said 627 people were injured.

A large section of Kesennuma, a town of 70,000 people in Miyagi, burned furiously into the night with no apparent hope of being extinguished, public broadcaster NHK said.

'The earthquake has caused major damage in broad areas in northern Japan,' Prime Minister Naoto Kan said at a news conference.

The quake was nearly 8,000 times stronger than one that struck New Zealand late last month, devastating the city of Christchurch.

'The energy radiated by this quake is nearly equal to one month's worth of energy consumption' in the United States, U.S. Geological Survey Scientist Brian Atwater said.

Even for a country used to earthquakes, this one was of horrific proportions.



Large fishing boats and other vessels rode high waves ashore, slamming against overpasses or scraping under them and snapping power lines along the way. Upturned and partially submerged cars bobbed in the water. Ships anchored in ports crashed against each other.

The tsunami roared over embankments, washing anything in its path inland before reversing directions and carrying the cars, homes and other debris out to sea. Flames shot from some of the homes, probably because of burst gas pipes.

Waves of muddy waters flowed over farmland near Sendai, carrying buildings, some of them ablaze. Drivers attempted to flee. Sendai airport was inundated with thick, muddy debris that included cars, trucks, buses and even light planes.