SENDAI (Kyodo) The dead and missing in the wake of Friday’s 9.0-magnitude quake and massive tsunami topped 5,000 Monday, after some 2,000 bodies were found along two shores in Miyagi Prefecture.

Police and firefighters meanwhile worked to recover another 200 to 300 bodies in Sendai, but the debris is slowing down the recovery effort.

Of the 2,000, about 1,000 were spotted on the coast at Minamisanriku, where the Miyagi Prefectural Government has been unable to ascertain the fate of about 10,000 people — over half the town’s population.

The findings point to a significantly increased death toll from the quake and tsunami.

About 1,000 bodies were found washing ashore at Miyagi’s hardest-hit Ojika Peninsula.

About 450,000 people had evacuated as of Sunday in Miyagi and five other prefectures, but water, food and fuel are in short supply in various locations where they have taken refuge, prompting the government to airlift supplies by Self-Defense Forces helicopters.

A South Korean was among the confirmed dead, according to the South Korean Foreign Ministry. China has been unable to contact about 100 trainees in the Miyagi city of Ishinomaki but was able to confirm the safety of 6,957 Chinese across Japan, according to Xinhua news agency.

LATEST NATIONAL STORIES Japan's internal affairs minister Seiko Noda opens political school for women Internal Affairs and Communications Minister Seiko Noda, a member of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, on Sunday opened a political school in Gifu Prefecture to foster female politicians.... Matsui ponders second Osaka merger referendum in 2019 Osaka Gov. Ichiro Matsui announced Monday that a second referendum on whether to merge Osaka's wards might be held during the nationwide local elections in April 2019, six months later than the ... Japanese government to train teachers on how to keep abduction issue fresh among younger generations The government will start a training program for schoolteachers in the autumn to foster better youth understanding of the abduction issue involving North Korea, officials said. The govern...

The whereabouts of about 2,500 tourists who were visiting the quake-hit areas has not been confirmed, the Japan Tourism Agency said.

Prime Minister Naoto Kan said in a morning meeting at the government disaster headquarters that emergency workers have rescued 15,000 survivors.

A Maritime Self-Defense Force destroyer rescued 32 people around the quay at Ishinomaki on Saturday, the Defense Ministry said separately.

Communications failures also continued in quake-hit areas centering on Miyagi and Iwate prefectures, with 561,000 phone lines and 221,400 fiber-optic connections operated by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone East Corp. remaining out of service as of 6 a.m.

With the country’s largest recorded quake having crippled a key nuclear power plant, Tokyo Electric Power Co. has started an unprecedented rationing of power in the Kanto region to make up for an expected power shortage.

The region-specific outages, expected to last at least until the end of April, will affect most of the 45 million people in the power firm’s service area in Tokyo and eight prefectures, with railways suspending most services in the region through Monday.