Featured Video Close More Video







TOKYO—A 7.3-magnitude earthquake struck early Saturday morning off Japan’s east coast, near the crippled Fukushima nuclear site, the U.S. Geological Survey said.

Japan’s meteorological agency said the quake was an aftershock of the magnitude-9.0 earthquake and tsunami that struck the same area in 2011, killing about 19,000 people and devastating the Fukushima Dai-Ichi nuclear power plant.

Tsunamis of up to 40 centimetres were reported at four areas along the coast on Saturday, but the advisory was lifted less than two hours after the quake.

There were no immediate reports of damage on land. Japanese television showed images of calm waters in the harbours.

The quake hit at 2:10 a.m. Tokyo time (1:10 p.m. Friday Toronto time) about 290 kilometres off Fukushima. It was felt in Tokyo, some 480 kilometres away.

“It was fairly big and rattled quite a bit, but nothing fell to the floor or broke. We’ve had quakes of this magnitude before,” said Satoshi Mizuno, an official with the Fukushima prefectural government’s disaster management department, by phone. “Luckily, the quake’s centre was very far off the coast.”

The operator of the troubled Fukushima Dai-ichi plant, Tokyo Electric Power Co., said no damage or abnormalities have been found so far, according to Mizuno.

Mizuno also confirmed that several plant workers near the coast were ordered to evacuate to higher ground.

Japan’s meteorological agency issued a 1-metre tsunami advisory for a long stretch of Japan’s northeastern coast, and it put the quake’s magnitude at 7.1. The U.S. Pacific Tsunami Warning Center did not post warnings for the rest of the Pacific.

The agency reported tsunamis of 40 centimetres in Kuji city in Iwate prefecture and Soma city in Fukushima, as well as a 20-centimetre tsunami at Ofunato city in Iwate prefecture and a 30-centimetre tsunami at Ishinomaki in Miyagi prefecture.

All but two of Japan’s 50 nuclear reactors have been offline since a March 2011 earthquake and ensuing tsunami triggered multiple meltdowns and massive radiation leaks at the Fukushima plant, about 250 kilometres northeast of Tokyo.

A string of mishaps this year at the Fukushima plant has raised international concerns about the operator’s ability to tackle the continuing crisis.