Japan tsunami victim's soccer ball found in Alaska ALASKA

Photo: Jiji Press, AFP/Getty Images Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 This handout picture taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the US and received via Jiji Press in Tokyo on April 23, 2012 shows a football which was found in Alaska and drifted from Japan's Rikuzentakata following the March, 2011 tsunami. Misaki Murakami, 16, lost his house and all its contents when the massive waves of last March crushed his hometown of Rikuzentakata in Japan's northeast. But now, thanks to an observant beachcomber in the Gulf of Alaska, he is set to have his football returned to him. The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) said an observant beachcomber, identified by Japanese media as 51-year-old David Baxter, had spotted the ball on a beach on Middleton Island, Alaska. TOPSHOTS JAPAN OUT AFP PHOTO / NOAA via JIJI PRESS ---EDITORS NOTE--- RESTRICTED TO EDITORIAL USE - MANDATORY CREDIT "AFP PHOTO / NOAA VIA JIJI PRESS" - NO MARKETING NO ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS - DISTRIBUTED AS A SERVICE TO CLIENTS (Photo credit should read JIJI PRESS/AFP/Getty Images) less This handout picture taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the US and received via Jiji Press in Tokyo on April 23, 2012 shows a football which was found in Alaska and drifted ... more Photo: Jiji Press, AFP/Getty Images Japan tsunami victim's soccer ball found in Alaska 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

A teenager who lost his home in Japan's devastating tsunami now knows that one prized possession survived: a soccer ball that drifted all the way to Alaska.

Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration say the ball with the youngster's name inscribed on it is one of the first pieces of debris from last year's tsunami to wash up on the other side of the Pacific.

A man found the ball while beachcombing on an Alaskan island, and his wife, who is Japanese, talked with its owner, 16-year-old Misaki Murakami, by phone over the weekend. They plan to send the ball back to him soon.

LATEST SFGATE VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing Woman hit by Sacramento sheriff's deputy vehicle during Stephon Clark protest Guy Danilowitz

The wettest and driest places in the Bay Area Ted Andersen, Alix Martichoux, SFGATE

The Regulars: The Mushroom Hacker Nani Walker, Robin Simmonds and Lauren Schwartzman

Candy Land: How West Oakland's Ocho Candy Makes Its Organic Sweet Treats Sarah Fritsche

Bernal Heights hit-and-run San Francisco Chronicle

Woman's car plunges 300 feet off cliff near Pacifica California Highway Patrol

SF Brewing Co. Ghirardelli Square Virtual Tour San Francisco Chronicle

The story behind You're Going to Die, SF's death-related open mike San Francisco Chronicle

Protesting the death of Stephon Clark: ‘You murdered a Son’ New York Times

David Nayfeld making pasta San Francisco Chronicle

Misaki, from the town of Rikuzentakata, is surprised and thankful the soccer ball has been found more than 3,000 miles away.

"I've never imagined that my ball has reached Alaska," Misaki told public broadcaster NHK. "I've lost everything in the tsunami. So I'm delighted."

He was particularly glad because all furniture and sentimental items in his home had been washed away in the March 11, 2011, tsunami, which devastated a long stretch of Japan's northeastern coast and killed about 19,000 people.

The ball was given to him in 2005, when Misaki was in third grade, as a goodbye gift when he transferred to another school.

Debris from the tsunami initially formed a thick mass in the ocean off Japan's northeastern coast and has since spread out across the Pacific. In February, NOAA said currents would carry much of the debris to the coasts of Alaska, Canada, Washington and Oregon between March 2013 and 2014, though they noted that some of it could arrive this year.

Earlier this month, a U.S. Coast Guard cutter fired on and sank a fishing boat in the Gulf of Alaska that had drifted from Japan after the tsunami. Authorities had deemed the ship a hazard to shipping and to the coastline.

David Baxter, a radar technician from Kasilof, Alaska, found Misaki's ball while beachcombing in March on Middleton Island, 70 miles south of the Alaskan mainland.

Baxter's wife, Yumi, reached Misaki with help from a Japanese reporter. Misaki expressed his gratitude to the couple "for wanting to take the time to even try to find him," David Baxter said.

Baxter also found a volleyball with Japanese writing on it a couple of weeks later, and NHK reported Monday that its owner was also found - Shiori Sato, 19, from Iwate prefecture.

The ball had her first name on it, and a viewer called in to the broadcaster to suggest contacting Sato.

"Good heavens!" she told NHK. "I want to say (to the ball) 'Welcome back!' I think it's a miracle."