AT least 613 people have been confirmed dead as Japan mobilises 50,000 military and other personnel to spearhead a Herculean rescue effort.

Every wing of the Self Defence Forces was thrown into frantic service, with hundreds of ships, aircraft and vehicles headed to the northeast coast where at least 1000 people were feared dead and entire neighbourhoods had vanished.

As emergency staff in the quake-prone archipelago dug through rubble and plucked survivors off the roofs of submerged houses, Prime Minister Naoto Kan warned that day one after the catastrophe was a crucial window for survivors.

"I realised the huge extent of the tsunami damage," the centre-left premier said after taking a helicopter tour of the apocalyptic scenes, before meeting his cabinet ministers for an emergency meeting in Tokyo.

"What used to be residential areas were mostly swept away in many coastal areas and fires are still blazing there," he told them.

media_camera

More than 215,000 people are in emergency shelters in eastern and northern Japan, the National Police Agency said.

The number includes more than 100,000 people who took refuge in the northern prefecture of Fukushima, including residents ordered to evacuate areas around two nuclear power plants.

The full scale of those left homeless is believed to be much higher, with police saying they have not received a tally from Miyagi, a hard-hit northern Japan province where hundreds of deaths have been reported.

Thousands more were trapped in buildings surrounded by swirling floodwaters in Miyagi, authorities said, after a towering wall of water generated by the 8.9-magnitude earthquake tore into homes, streets and towns.

The United States, with almost 50,000 troops stationed in Japan, sent aircraft carriers to waters off the disaster zone - just one of scores of nations that has offered assistance since Friday's monster quake.

US forces on Friday helped Japan rapidly react by delivering a cooling agent to a nuclear plant where malfunctions threatened a dangerous meltdown.

In the utter bleakness on the east coast of Japan's main Honshu island, where at least 3600 houses were destroyed by the 8.9-magnitude quake, there were some rays of hope amid the carnage of smashed towns and shattered lives.

Army helicopters airlifted people off the roof of a primary school in Watari, Miyagi, and naval and coastguard choppers did the same to rescue 81 people from a ship that had been hurled out to sea by the tsunami.

But for every piece of good news, there were more reminders of nature's cruelty against this seismically unstable nation - including the latest of a series of strong aftershocks in the morning, measuring a hefty 6.8.

In large coastal areas, entire neighbourhoods were destroyed, with unknown numbers of victims buried in the rubble of their homes or lost to the sea, where cars, shipping containers, debris and entire houses were afloat.

The coastal city of Rikuzentakata in Iwate was almost completely destroyed and submerged, said the Fire and Disaster Management Agency.

Japan's military started its mass deployment yesterday, when it dispatched 300 planes and an armada of 20 naval destroyers and other ships, while some 25 air force jets flew reconnaissance missions over the disaster zone.

The Tokyo and Osaka police forces and the health ministry also all quickly dispatched medical and rescue teams.

Among the international help pledged, a team from South Korea, with five rescue personnel and two sniffer dogs, was set to arrive on Saturday.

Japan said it had been offered help by scores of other governments - among them Australia, China, New Zealand, Israel, Singapore, Indonesia, India, Russia, Turkey, Germany, France, Belgium, Ukraine, Slovakia, United Arab Emirates, Switzerland, Hungary, Poland, Jordan, Britain, the European Union, Chile, Spain, Greece, Hong Kong, Pakistan, Argentina and Iceland.

The United States, which occupied Japan after World War II and is the country's main security ally, has many of its forces stationed on the southern island of Okinawa, far from the quake zone.

Two aircraft carriers were en route to the disaster zone - the USS George Washington, which is based near Tokyo, and the USS Ronald Reagan, which was on its way to South Korea for exercises and has been redirected to Japan.

AT least 427 people have been killed in the massive earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan, with estimates of more than 1000 people dead.

Where you there when the quake struck? Do you know someone in Japan?

Tell us below or contact our news desk on 03 9292 2000 Send video or pictures: MMS to 0404 333 444 or email online@heraldsun.com.au

Unbelievable damage



Helicopter footage showed massive inundation in northern coastal towns, where floods of black water sent shipping containers, cars and debris crashing through streets.

Mud waves were shown racing upstream along the Natori river in Sendai, blanketing farm fields.

The tsunami flooded Sendai airport, submerging the runway while a process known as liquefaction, caused by the intense shaking of the tremor, turned parts of the ground to liquid.

"I've never seen anything like this," said 41-year-old official Ken Hoshi from Ishinomaki, a port city in Miyagi.



"The water came as far as to the train station hundreds of metres away from the coast."

The Department of Foreign Affairs said the Australian Embassy in Japan was trying to find out if any Australians have been affected.



There are hundreds of Australians registered in the affected areas. About 11,000 Australians are estimated to live in Japan.

The Government said people who have concerns about the welfare of family and friends they are unable to contact, can call the 24-hour emergency hotline 1300 555 135.

A spokeswoman said communications infrastructure and mobile phone networks were slow.



media_camera Seismic monitor

The quake was the biggest Japan has experienced since records began, eclipsing the 7.9-magnitude Great Kanto Earthquake that devastated Tokyo in 1923, and the 6.8-magnitude quake that hit Kobe in 1996.

The quake was the world's seventh largest on record, according to the US Geological Survey (USGS).

Several quakes have hit the same region in recent days, including a 7.3 magnitude one on Wednesday.

Japan, is located on the "Pacific Ring of Fire" and dotted with volcanoes, and Tokyo is situated in one of its most dangerous areas.

media_camera Giant quakes

AFP

Originally published as Forces join in rescue operation