A poll conducted by Egyptian polling centre, Baseera, in cooperation with a program called "Yahdoth fi Misr" (Happening in Egypt), shows former army chief Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi receiving the support of over half of the population.

Responding to the question concerning preference for either of the two candidates, 72 percent of respondents backed El-Sisi while only two percent backed his sole contender, Nasserist figure Hamdeen Sabahi. Twenty-two percent were undecided, three percent refused to respond and one percent said they would nullify their vote.

According to Baseera, 85 percent of the respondents said they would participate in the elections, ten percent said they will not and five percent were undecided.

Eighty-one and 88 percent of respondents from urban and rural Egypt respectively said they will participate. Eighty-one percent of those under the age of 30 said they will take part in the elections and 91 percent of those above the age of 50.

In the last poll conducted by Baseera for the period of 27 February to 4 March, El-Sisi only held the support of 51 percent of the population while 45 percent said they were still undecided. Sabahi only received one percent of the population’s support.

Of those in the current poll, conducted for the period between 28 April and 2 May 2014, who said they will not vote, 25 percent stated that it is because they think their vote will not matter, 18 percent are not convinced by either of the two candidates and 10 percent because they are undecided with the remainder giving various other reasons.

The poll shows El-Sisi is more popular among older generations, supported by 69 percent of respondents between the age of 18 and 29 and 75 percent of respondents over the age of 50.

Meanwhile, Sabahi holds the support of five percent of respondents between age 18 to 29 and only one percent of respondents over 50 years of age.

The survey was conducted via phone calls with two 2005 citizens. The sample included respondents from the age of 18 and above and covered all of Egypt's governorates.

Short link:

