By NOURHAN MAGDI

CAIRO: The Revolutionary Socialists called on Egyptians to vote for Hamdeen Sabbahi against Field Marshal Abdel Fatah al-Sisi during the forthcoming presidential elections, in a Sunday statement on their official website.

“The Revolutionary Socialists have decided to participate in the [presidential] elections and not to boycott. It is the right decision for the current political situation, in order to promote publicity against the counter-revolution’s candidate,” read the statement.

The movement said that their decision came amid what they referred to as the recession of the revolutionary state, and the issuance of restrictive laws, as well as promoting Sisi as the nation’s savior along with counter-revolution’s efforts to win over the revolutionary forces.

However, the movement also criticized Sabbahi’s “silent stances” regarding the violations against freedom committed by the army and the interior ministry.

“Each voice that is deducted from Sisi does have its value, even if not today, but it will be used to build a real, rooted opposition day after day.”

Sabbahi and Sisi are the only official presidential candidates, after Sisi’s campaign presented approximately 200,000 endorsements to the High Presidential Elections Committee on April 14 and Sabbahi submitted 31,100 electoral endorsements from 17 governorates on Saturday. The presidential elections are due May 26-27.

In the same statement, the current demanded that a number of axes be adopted in Sabbahi’s platform, including transitional justice, the release of the detainees, applying minimum and maximum wage in both the public and private sectors, enhancing popular democratic participation and guaranteeing national independence.

Although immense public support for Field Marshal Abdel Fatah al-Sisi suggests he might sweep the upcoming presidential elections, several alternative voices oppose the aspiring candidate and plan to send their votes elsewhere, if they vote at all.

The Muslim Brotherhood, recently designated as a terrorist organization, declared that they will boycott the elections. However they announced opposition to Sisi’s candidacy, claiming that Sisi would become president through “vote rigging.”

Moreover, division was witnessed inside the Tamarod movement, launched to petition against former President Mohamed Morsi, where several of its leading members declared their support for Sabbahi, while another faction within the movement backs Sisi.