Int'l community congratulates El-Sisi, plans for cooperation



Ahram Online, AFP, Wednesday 4 Jun 2014



World leaders offer Egypt's new president-elect congratulations and commitment to international partnership



Soon after Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi was announced Egypt's president-elect on Tuesday evening, the international community mostly reacted positively, with several heads of state congratulating him on the position.



The US, the UK, Saudi Arabia, Iran and Russia all made statements regarding El-Sisi's sweeping victory.



United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon also said on Wednesday that he puts his faith in Egypt's president-elect.



The US and the UK, among the states that said they looked forward to working with Egypt's new president, also stressed the importance of ensuring freedom of expression in Egypt.



On Tuesday evening,the Presidential Elections Commission (PEC) declared El-Sisi Egypt's new president, confirming that he won 23.78 million votes (96.91 percent of the valid ballots) in the 26-28 May election.



El-Sisi's sole contender, leftist politician Hamdeen Sabahi, collected a modest 757,511 of the votes (3.9 percent).



According to PEC chairman Judge Anwar El-Assi, 25,578,233 Egyptians voted in the elections, a turnout of 47.5 percent. Spoilt votes exceeded the votes for Sabahi, with 1,040,608 invalidated ballots.



El-Sisi appeared on television an hour after he was named the country's new leader to express his gratitude over the election results.



"My emotions are mixed with happiness and aspiration: my happiness for what you have achieved and my aspiration to be worthy of your trust," said the ex-defence minister on Tuesday.



El-Sisi announced that "now is the time for work," with the future target being to realise the revolutions' goals of freedom, dignity, humanity and social justice.



Washington looks forward to working with El-Sisi:



Washington stated on Wednesday it looks forward to working with Egypt's president-elect Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi, urging his government to ensure freedoms and enact democratic reforms.



The US administration was pleased that international monitors were allowed to observe the vote, added the statement, noting that observers found the vote was administered "professionally and in line with Egyptian laws".



As AFP reported President Barack Obama, currently travelling in Europe, plans to speak to El-Sisi in the coming days.



UK congratulates El-Sisi:



British Foreign Secretary William Hague said in an official statement issued on Tuesday that Britain is looking 'to President-elect Sisi to take steps to implement the rights contained in Egypt’s constitution.



He stated that Britain is looking forward to working with El-Sisi's government on strengthening the "broad and productive relationship between both our peoples."



Britain's top diplomat argued that the best way for Egyptians to achieve the goals of the 25 January revolution is through an inclusive political process in which all groups can participate.



Saudi King hails the election of El-Sisi:



Saudi King Abdullah Tuesday hailed the election of Egypt's ex-army chief Abdel Fatah al-Sisi to the presidency as a "historic day," calling for a donors conference to help Egypt through its economic troubles.



The king, whose wealthy country is a strong ally of Egypt, said Sisi's sweeping win with 96.9 percent of the vote represents a "historic day and a new stage for Egypt," in a telegram published by Saudi state news agency SPA.



King Abdullah also urged "brothers and friends to avoid meddling in Egypt's internal affairs," warning that harming Egypt would amount to "harming Islam, Arabism and Saudi Arabia."



Iran receives an invitation to attend the inauguration:



Iranian president Hassan Rouhani received an invitation late on Monday from Egypt's interim leader Adly Mansour to attend the inauguration of Egypt's upcoming president Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi.



The Iranian Chief-of-Staff Mohamed Nahavandian, who expressed his hope "that the democratic process in Egypt will reflect the will of the people".



He further affirmed the importance of historic and cultural ties between Egypt and Iran, stressing the need for communication between them.



Russia's Putin congratulates El-Sisi:



Russian President Vladimir Putin congratulated Egypt's president-elect, Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi on Friday, on his "convincing" victory.



Putin congratulated El-Sisi on Friday prior to the final results which were announced Tuesday evening.



According to a statement published by the Russian presidency, the two state leaders "agreed to maintain active contacts and exchange visits at the top level."



Ban Ki-moon puts his faith in El-Sisi:



United Nations chief Ban Ki-moon said on Tuesday he trusts that Egypt's president-elect Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi will do everything possible to support the Egyptian people's aspirations for a "stable, democratic and prosperous Egypt."



The international organisation's top official accentuated the necessity of "fostering long-term security and stability" through peaceful dialogue and contestation, along with creating a conducive environment for good governance, development and protecting human rights.



http://english.ahram.org.eg/News/102903.aspx