View Images Dharahara Tower, which loomed over Kathmandu for 183 years, is in rubble after Saturday's earthquake.

Photograph by Niranjan Shrestha, AP/Corbis

While the 19th-century watchtower was a civic icon, sites of critical importance to the more ancient cultural and religious legacy of Nepal have also been damaged and destroyed by the quake. A country that occupies a mountainous land 1/20 the size of India (approximately the size of the U.S. state of Arkansas), Nepal is nonetheless home to eight UNESCO World Heritage cultural sites. That includes three royal cities and several Hindu and Buddhist sites within the Kathmandu Valley, as well as Lumbini, the legendary birthplace of the Buddha, all of which are in the area affected by the quake. (Read about the discovery of the world's oldest Buddhist shrine.)

“These monuments are not museums or beautifully ornate structures but special places on the earth where it is possible for ordinary people to reach out and commune with their guiding goddesses and gods,” says Robin Coningham, an archaeologist at Durham University and a director of excavation at Lumbini. “Literally, they are portals where heaven touches the earth and they are the center point for the daily, weekly and monthly lives of millions.”

Nepal is still suffering significant aftershocks, and communications—particularly in mountainous and remote areas where many of the nation’s cultural monuments can be found—are extremely limited or non-existent. But this is what we know so far about the fate of Nepal’s World Heritage sites:

Kathmandu Durbar Square

View Images Photographs by John Harper, Corbis (left), Narendra Shrestha, EPA (right)

Nepal’s Durbar Squares, also known as “noble courts” or “palace squares,” are the historical heart of the country’s cities and are centered around palaces, temples and public places.

In Kathmandu, Durbar Square has sustained severe damage; parts of the Hanuman Dhoka, the city’s oldest palace—built by the Malla kings in the 16th century—have collapsed, along with the pagodas of several temples.

A video taken by a tourist shows the moment the earthquake strikes Kathmandu Durbar Square:

Scary video taken by Turkish tourist Sözcü Gazetesi of the destruction of Kathmandu Darbar Square. #NepalQuake https://t.co/WuEuAa4yUE — Kunda Dixit (@kundadixit) April 27, 2015

Bhaktapur Durbar Square

View Images Photographs by Peter Barritt/Robert Harding World Imagery, Corbis (left), Navesh Chitrakar, Reuters (right)

Bhaktapur, the “City of Devotees” is located 12 miles (20 km) east of Kathmandu and is the best preserved of Nepal’s old cities, despite being severely damaged in the 1934 quake. Coningham has reported that up to 80% of the temples around its Durbar Square are destroyed, including the 18th-century Vatsala Durga temple, a towering sandstone structure that evoked the peaks surrounding the city.

Boudhanath Temple

View Images Photograph by Nicola Aurelio Paltani, Getty

The fifth-century AD stupa—a mound housing sacred relics—of Boudhanath is among the largest in the world and serves as a center of pilgrimage for Nepalese and Tibetan Buddhists. Located about six miles (10 km) from Kathmandu, it is surrounded by a complex of more than 50 gompas, or Tibetan monasteries. While there appears to be significant damage to surrounding structures, the 1500-year-old stupa has survived, with reports of cracks in the spire.

Reports on Twitter suggest that the Boudhanath stupa is relatively undamaged:

@sonianarang still up.No major damage. Only few 'coatings' fell off.Boudhanath is standing tall. — Bipin Thapa (@bipin977) April 27, 2015

Changu Narayan

View Images Photograph by John-Claude White, National Geographic

Lumbini

View Images Photograph by Ira Block, National Geographic Creative

Dated to the sixth century B.C., Lumbini is the oldest Buddhist shrine in the world as well as the legendary site of the Buddha’s birth. Coningham says that a massive frame surrounding the Maya Devi temple, marking the god’s birthplace, has protected the site from earthquake damage.

Pashupatinath Temple

View Images The Pashupatinath Temple near Kathmandu, Nepal.

Photograph by James P. Blair, National Geographic Creative

Pashupatinath Temple vies with Changu Narayan as the oldest Hindu temple in Nepal and is considered one of the most important temples dedicated to the Hindu god Shiva, the Destroyer. It appears to have survived the earthquake, and Nepalis are bringing victims to temple to perform last rites.

The temple is now the site of last rites for hundreds of earthquake victims:

Nepal: 100s cremated near Pashupatinath temple https://t.co/4aKxPpg6sn — Times of India (@timesofindia) April 26, 2015

View Images Photographs by Jill Schneider, National Geographic Creative (left), Pratap Thapa, Xinhua/Corbis (right)

Located in modern Lalitpur in the south-central Kathmandu Valley, the Patan Durbar is a royal palace complex built in the 17th century and is the seat of one of Nepal’s three kingdoms. According to Coningham, the recently restored Sundari Chowk (courtyard), as well as the most important temple in the Durbar Square, the Krishna Mandir, have survived. However, many smaller pagoda temples have collapsed.

View Images Photograph by Kurt Werby, All Canada Photos/Corbis

This fifth-century temple complex west of Kathmandu features what is perhaps Nepal’s most iconic stupa, with colorful eyes of the Buddha emblazoned on its surface. The stupa has survived, yet the 17th-century Pratapur Temple adjacent to the stupa, which was heavily damaged by lightning in 2011 and recently restored, appears to have collapsed.

An aerial view of Swayambhunath posted on Twitter shows the collapsed Pratapur Temple to the left of the stupa: