Image copyright AP Image caption Two helicopters and four Ospreys have been sent by the US to Nepal

Troops and emergency aircraft from the United States have arrived in Nepal to help deliver aid to remote areas hit by last week's devastating earthquake.

Relief efforts near the epicentre have been hampered by a lack of aircraft.

About 100 US Marines, two helicopters and four Ospreys capable of vertical take-off are now in Kathmandu.

Their arrival comes as Nepal's only international airport has banned larger aircraft carrying aid from landing because of concerns over its runway.

More than 7,000 people died in the magnitude 7.8 earthquake. More than 14,021 people were injured.

The epicentre was in the Gorkha region, and many roads to the hilly district are impassable due to landslides.

The six aircraft are due to begin aid flights on Monday.

Image copyright AFP Image caption Tribhuvan Airport has been the hub for international aid efforts for Nepal

Brig Gen Paul Kennedy said: "We've got search and rescue teams waiting to go out to the remote areas, we've got relief supplies, especially shelters."

New restrictions on planes landing at Kathmandu airport will not affect aid flights, a Nepali government spokesman said.

Planes heavier than 196 tonnes had been allowed to land since the earthquake but restrictions have been imposed because of potholes on the runway, officials say.

Also on Sunday, the United Nations said the problem of customs controls holding up aid deliveries from the airport was "diminishing".

"The government has taken note of some of the concerns that we've expressed to them and they've addressed those," said Jamie McGoldrick, who is co-ordinating the UN relief effort in Kathmandu.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Drone video showed the devastation in Nepal's Sindhupalchok district, near the earthquake epicentre

Image copyright Reuters Image caption Victims from the Sindhupalchok district were airlifted to Kathmandu on Sunday

Image copyright AFP Image caption Meanwhile the clean-up continued in one of Kathmandu's historic squares

Landslides and poor weather have hampered efforts to deliver aid to isolated areas.

The death toll could go up, as search and rescue efforts continuing in several hill districts including Dhading, Rasuwa and Sindhupalchok, the government has said.

While the vast majority of casualties were in Nepal, about 100 people are reported to have died in neighbouring India, China and Bangladesh.

On Sunday, Nepali police released a list of foreigners who had been killed or injured. The largest group of nationals affected is Indians, with 39 known to have died and 10 injured.

The EU envoy to Nepal, Rensje Teerink, said on Friday that the whereabouts of 1,000 EU citizens was still unknown.

Nepal earthquake relief $415 million needed for humanitarian relief 3 million people in need of food aid

130,000 houses destroyed

24,000 people living in makeshift camps

20 teams working to reunite lost children with their families AFP

How long can people survive under rubble?

Medical priorities

Satellite reveals quake movement

Nepal quake special report

Deaths in worst-affected areas (1 May)