A Massive Earthquake was experienced in several states of North India including Bihar, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan and Delhi. The epicentre of Earthquake was located 29 km (18mi) ESE of Lamjung, Nepal where it was recorded 7.9 on Richter scale, reports United States Geological Survey. In India the observed magnitude has been upto 7.5 according to IMD. An aftershock of intensity was 6.6 on the Richter Scale, was also experienced in various parts of india.

Also See: In Pics: Damages in India due to Earthquake on 25 April 2015

In Patna, the tremor was extensive, however no damage was done. Residents panicked and came outdoors within minutes of have experienced tremors. In Darbhanga district of Bihar, 2 people have died and over 10 got injured.

In Nepal, it caused extensive damage with toppled walls and collapsed buildings. According to reports, the UNESCO World Heritage site of Kathmandu Durbar Square (similar to Delhi’s Qutub Minar) collapsed during the earthquake. 2 Casualties have been reported in Nepal.

Few reports suggest that 2 people have died in Barabanki (Uttar Pradesh) due to the Earthquake. CM Akhilesh Yadav has announced Rs. 2 lakh ex-gratia to each.

In the aftermath, an avalanche was observed in parts pf Himalayas near Mount Everest.

Latest visuals of houses that collapsed due to #earthquake in Anamnagar, Kathmandu, sent to #ani pic.twitter.com/YH6nyFBtbY — ANI (@ANI_news) April 25, 2015

I'm praying for the people who were affected by the #earthquake in #Kathmandu the pictures were really shocking pic.twitter.com/zHccBXCPhU — Bel (@ashbel_nialler) April 25, 2015

“We are in the process of finding more information and are working to reach out to those affected, both at home and in Nepal,” Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has instructed Rajiv Pratap Rudy to take stock of situation in Bihar/UP districts along Nepal border. All disaster management mechanisms have been activated in districts of Bihar/UP along Nepal border

PM Modi has also called high-level meeting at 3pm to discuss situation emerging due to the earthquake.

“Information is being collected from all districts, everyone is on the field” Bihar CM Nitish Kumar told media persons regarding earthquake.

Delhi: Bihar CM Nitish Kumar talks to administration after tremors felt in North Delhi #earthquake pic.twitter.com/mK9pqHeQ35 — ANI (@ANI_news) April 25, 2015

The U.S. Geological Survey said the quake hit at 11:56 a.m. local time (0611 GMT) at a shallow depth of 11 kilometers (7 miles).

According to reports, some tremors were also felt in Lahore (Pakistan), Tibet, Bangladesh and Bhutan.