Our heart goes with victims of earthquake-hit Nepal. State is disbursing 5 Crore to victims and one day salary from our MLAs as solidarity: Chhattisgarh CM Raman Singh.

Total number of Helicopter sorties today - 35 (by 7 PM), cumulative - 120. IAF has so far evacuated 2865 persons frm Nepal 2 India by 36 sorties and airlifting 238.5 tons of relief & equipment 2 Nepal, says spokesperson MOD.

#NepalEarthquake Total Number of Helicopter sorties today: 35 (by 7 PM); Cumulative-120 pic.twitter.com/cxdjvPkxqc — Sitanshu Kar (@SpokespersonMoD) April 28, 2015

#NepalEarthquake IAF has so far evacuated 2865 persons frm Nepal 2 India by 36 sorties & airlifting 238.5 tons of relief & equipment 2 Nepal — Sitanshu Kar (@SpokespersonMoD) April 28, 2015

Approximately 4000 Indians are being brought in 80 buses from Nepal. The bus route is probably the best way to return to India now, as least affected by weather. Buses are not going empty; they go with relief material, returning with people. Our engineering teams too are helping in Nepal quake relief to keep the roads operational: Foreign Secretary.

As a result of helicopter sorties, better appreciation of severely affected areas now. Intend to use both Kathmandu and Pokhra as bases from where helicopters can fly to badly affected areas. Have evacuated 741 Nepalis, cumulative relief material of 24 tonnes to the interior affected areas. 19 mountaineers have been evacuated from Lukala. 3 field hospitals with 45 beds operational; surgeries have started. 342 Indians evacuated by IAF, bringing cumulative number to 2,865: Defence Secretary.

Also Read: Will do everything possible to help quake-hit Nepal: PM Narendra Modi

Will do everything possible to help quake-hit Nepal: PM Narendra Modi Full assistance assured to states, no assistance sought from them. 3 ministers would be visiting Bihar soon. As per inputs from DG, SSB, 251 foreign nationals have entered India through land route. 3 NDRF teams have reached Nepal today, 3 more teams reaching today, altogether 16 teams: Home Secretary.

A few more rescue and relief flights plying today. Our Ambassador called on the Nepal PM and Army Chief today, both of them appreciated Indian assistance. 170 nationals from 15 countries evacuated by air so far. As per latest reports, remains of 6 tourists handed over, 7 more Indian fatalities: Foreign Secretary.

NDRF, IAF, Indian Army and voluntary bodies are doing a commendable job in Nepal. Their efforts bringing some relief in tough times: Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today reiterated India's commitment to do everything possible to help quake-hit Nepal and said that it was not alone at this moment of tragedy. Speaking at a joint press briefing with Afghan President Ashraf Ghani, Modi said that India will certainly be there when the citizens of Nepal rebuild their lives and homes.

Also Read: Nepal PM came to know about earthquake from Narendra Modi's tweets

Nepal PM came to know about earthquake from Narendra Modi's tweets A total of 98 large-scale aftershocks were recorded till 12 noon today, 72 hours after the massive earthquake with epicentre in Gorkha district shook the country on Saturday. The tremor measuring 7.6 on the Richter scale was felt with the epicentre at Barpak, Gorkha, at 11:56 am on Saturday morning. After that, two large scale tremors measuring over 6 on the Richter scale and 96 aftershocks from 4 to 6 Richter scale were recorded.

Over 50,000 pregnant women affected in Nepal quake: UN.

Death toll in Nepal earthquake crosses 5,000, as per reports.

An AN-32 aircraft with two tons of food material lands at Pokhara airfield, says Defence Ministry.

Nepal's ambassador to India Deep Upadhyay thanks Indian Air Force for bringing relief material.

Over 8 million people have been affected by the massive Nepal quake, says UN

Also Read: UN releases USD 15 million emergency aid for quake-hit Nepal

UN releases USD 15 million emergency aid for quake-hit Nepal India's organisation Vishva Hindu Parishad said it would offer extensive support to quake-ravaged Nepal by helping to rebuild residential houses, temples and shrines which have been flattened by the devastating temblor. The VHP will also bring orphaned children from the country to India and provide for their education and upbringing at its numerous educational institutions spread across the country.

The US praises India's leadership role in helping earthquake-hit Nepal. "India has demonstrated its global leadership in recent weeks, first in Yemen and now in Nepal. We are grateful; we are impressed; we are inspired. And because our cooperation is expanding, India is using C-17s and C-130s on the front lines of its response," US Ambassador to India Richard Verma said.

India presses six more teams of NDRF personnel into its relief and rescue operations in Nepal. With the induction of the new teams on the fourth day of the disaster, the total number of National Disaster Response Force teams in Nepal has gone up to 16 with 10 already engaged in rescue operations there for the last few days. Each NDRF team has about 45 personnel.​

GIC Re, the largest re-insurer in Nepal, said the company is expecting to pay a whopping Rs 1,000-crore claim against the damages caused by earthquake. The company hinted that it may increase its reinsurance premium in Nepal in the future.

The Indian Railways have added additional coaches in several trains for different destinations to accommodate the families of those hit by devastating earthquake in Nepal.

A convoy comprising 5,000 blankets,500 tents, 50 tarpaulin and 800 plastic sheets left for Pokhra from COD Kanpur today.

04 ALH’s stationed at Pokhra evacuated 25 women and children and 11 stretcher casualties from North of Gorkha #NepalEarthquake #OpMaitri — ADG PI - INDIAN ARMY (@adgpi) April 28, 2015

04 ALH’s stationed at Pokhra evacuated 25 women and children and 11 stretcher casualties from North of Gorkha #NepalEarthquake #OpMaitri — ADG PI - INDIAN ARMY (@adgpi) April 28, 2015

Indian Army Electric Grid Assessment Team Estb at Kathmandu for restoration of electricity #OpMaitri — ADG PI - INDIAN ARMY (@adgpi) April 28, 2015

Four teams from Médecins Sans Frontières or Doctors Without Borders have reached Nepal to assess the most urgent medical needs following the earthquake.

One Indian Army medical team which moved to Barpak in Nepal is now operational for medical assistance.

Six persons have been evacuated by an Indian Army team from Barpak/Marpak to Kathmandu.

Remaining members of the Engineering Task Force took off for Kathmandu today along with two SSL, one JCB, one water truck, one light vehicle, one load carrier and satellite phones.

The National Disaster Response Force suspends relief operations in Kathmandu until rain subsides.

Heavy rainfall in Nepal's capital Kathmandu, hampering rescue work of disaster teams.

Also Read: Torrential rain adds to quake-hit Kathmandu's misery

Torrential rain adds to quake-hit Kathmandu's misery The US has announced fresh aid of USD 9 million for quake-hit Nepal. Talking to reporters, US Secretary of State John Kerry said his country has sent a disaster response team along with rescue dogs to search for survivors.

The Indian Army establishes 45-bedded hospital at Lagankhel, Nepal to help those injured in the quake.

India asks its citizens in Nepal not to panic in the wake of the devastating quake, saying an evacuation process is in place and the situation is improving. "There are a large number of Indians. We have an open border and visa-free access and easily walk in to each other's country. Our priority right now is to focus on the injured, elderly people, children and women," India's Ambassador to Nepal Ranjit Rae said.

The death toll in Nepal`s earthquake could reach 10,000, Prime Minister Sushil Koirala told a news agency, admitting that it was challenging time for his country. "The government is doing all it can for rescue and relief on a war footing," Koirala said in an interview. "It is a challenge and a very difficult hour for Nepal."

Also Read: Death toll in Nepal may touch 10,000, says PM Koirala

Death toll in Nepal may touch 10,000, says PM Koirala India's External Affairs Ministry spokesman Vikas Swarup tweets that his country sent more materials for rescue and relief efforts to Nepal today.

#IndiaWithNepal More materials for rescue and relief efforts today: 2 Engineering Task Forces, 100 Personnel, 55 tonnes of drinking water — Vikas Swarup (@MEAIndia) April 28, 2015

#IndiaWithNepal 8 Tonnes of Baby food and skimmed milk, 6 Tonnes of Medicines, 2 Tonnes of biscuits in other material pic.twitter.com/JTDng3Hdl8 — Vikas Swarup (@MEAIndia) April 28, 2015

Around 200 people have been rescued from the Mount Everest, Nepal`s Tourism Ministry said on Tuesday and added that 19 people are dead.

India's Home Minister Rajnath Singh, on Twitter, said that the National Disaster Response Force has rescued 11 individuals, recovered 67 dead bodies and evacuated more than 1,000 people in Nepal.

Spoke to DG NDRF Shri OP Singh this morning who apprised me of the ongoing rescue operations in earthquake affected areas of Nepal — Rajnath Singh (@BJPRajnathSingh) April 28, 2015

NDRF has rescued 11 individuals, recovered 67 dead bodies and evacuated more than 1000 people in Nepal. — Rajnath Singh (@BJPRajnathSingh) April 28, 2015

The NDRF, Indian Army and other forces are doing a remarkable job in Nepal. — Rajnath Singh (@BJPRajnathSingh) April 28, 2015

India hands over more relief material to Nepal's Home Secretary.

10 trucks of food,7 trucks of water, 1 truck of essential medicine handed over to Home Secretary of Nepal @MEAIndia pic.twitter.com/TzEWs2VJyE — Embassy of India KTM (@eoiktmnp) April 28, 2015

Hundreds of Nepalis, angered and frustrated by the government`s slow response, were digging through rubble themselves today to find remains of their loved ones.

Eighteen trucks with relief material sent by the Uttar Pradesh government reach Nepal's capital Kathmandu. Out of 18, 10 trucks are carrying food, seven have mineral water and one has medicines. A team of doctors has also reached Kathmandu, says a UP government official.

Officials of the Nepalese Consulate in Kolkata have not been able to get in touch with their families back home since Saturday, when the massive earthquake jolted the Himalayan country and killed over 4,000 people. Nepal's Consul General in Kolkata Chandra Kumar Ghimire said communications lines to the Himalayan Country are in disarray due to the earthquake.

India is all set to evacuate more of its citizens from Nepal.

Buses leaving from Tilganga bridge, near Kathmandu International airport for Gorakhpur @MEAIndia pic.twitter.com/QJxHcPjFsf — Embassy of India KTM (@eoiktmnp) April 28, 2015

India's Minister of State for External Affairs Gen (retd) VK Singh, who oversaw evacuation in Yemen successfully, tells a news agency that the Indian government is doing a lot. Being citizens of this country, we also have a responsibility to help people of Nepal, says Singh.

Sent off the 1st batch of aid material collected by supporters. Hoping 2send more in the coming days.Donate as much as u can #IndiaWithNepal — Vijay Kumar Singh (@Gen_VKSingh) April 28, 2015

Nepal's Ministry of Home Affairs says that among one dozen worst affected districts, capital Kathmandu and Sindhupalchowk top the list with the confirmed deaths of 1,039 and 1,176 people respectively.

At least 4,352 bodies have so far been recovered, a Nepalese police official said. A further 8,063 people have been injured in the quake.

In the wake of reports that Nepalis are frustrated with inefficiency of the government, Nepal's Prime Minister Sushil Koirala admits that the rescue and relief operations have not been effective. He further urges the political parties to work together in this national crisis.

India's Minister of State for External Affairs Gen (retd) VK Singh, who oversaw evacuation in Yemen successfully, tells a news agency that the Indian government is doing a lot. Being citizens of this country, we also have a responsibility to help people of Nepal, adds Singh.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on microblogging website Twitter, says Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas Dharmendra Pradhan is coordinating relief work from Raxaul (Bihar) to help affected people.

In Raxaul, MEA, Indian Oil & Security Forces are facilitating the sending of affected people coming from Nepal back to their homes. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) April 28, 2015

Experts have analysed that the earthquake that devastated Nepal shifted the earth beneath Kathmandu by about three metres (10 feet) southward, but the height of Mount Everest likely stayed the same.​

Also Read: Quake moves Kathmandu but Everest height unchanged: Experts

Quake moves Kathmandu but Everest height unchanged: Experts ​Defence Ministry spokesperson Sitanshu Kar tweeted that a C-17 Globemaster III with 207 passengers on board from Nepal's capital Kathmandu has landed at Palam airport.

#NepalEarthquake Arrival of passengers from Kathmandu at Palam by C-17 Globemaster III this morning-2. pic.twitter.com/v0gE7JsEvS — Sitanshu Kar (@SpokespersonMoD) April 28, 2015