The Non-Resident Nepalese Association Canada has set up a donation page and Paypal account on its website to ask members and others to contribute to fundraising efforts.

Community organizations representing 10,000 Nepalese-Canadians in Toronto have pledged to set up fundraising efforts in wake of the disaster.

Here is a roundup of some of the ways governments and local leaders are trying to help pick up the pieces.

As the death toll continued to rise in the wake of a 7.8-magnitude earthquake that rocked Nepal Saturday morning, governments, humanitarian organizations, medical officials and community groups from across the globe jumped into action.

The Canadian government is sending a disaster aid team to earthquake stricken Nepal and contributing $5 million to relief efforts, Foreign Affairs Minister Rob Nicholson’s office confirmed late Saturday.

Gopal Bhandari, president of Nepalese Canadian Community Services, hopes his organization can help raise $50,000 by next Saturday. Community leaders are expected to continue to discuss fundraising options in an emergency meeting Sunday.

The Canadian Red Cross is providing life-saving assistance in the wake of the violent earthquake, according to Chiran Livera, the organization’s deputy director of operations.

Care Canada has decided to send Canadian staff, including a logistician, an information management person and communications expert to support its sister operation in Nepal.

Médecins Sans Frontières Canada, a medical humanitarian organization, has sent people to Nepal from its India office.

Other humanitarian organizations have also pledged their support for relief efforts in the devastated Asian country, such as The Canadian Red Cross, GlobalMedic,

World Vision Canada, , ShelterBox Canada and UNICEF Canada.

International:

The Asian Development Bank announced a $3 million grant to Nepal Monday to help provide desperately needed tents, medicine, food and water.

Spain's government planned to send a chartered jet to Nepal loaded with tons of donated aid from the government and charities, including material to build water storage distribution points and latrines, tarps for shelters plus blankets and cooking sets for more than 500 families.

A British Royal Air Force plane loaded with aid was also expected to arrive in Nepal Monday.

The U.S. embassy in Nepal announced $1 million in immediate aid, and the country’s agency for international development activated its urban search and rescue team to help with recovery efforts.

A Chinese search and rescue team, made up of 62 members and six dogs, was expected to arrive in Kathmandu Sunday, according to the country’s state-run Xinhua News Agency, citing the China Earthquake Administration.

Doctors Without Borders (Medecins Sans Frontieres) said four teams in India would leave for Nepal Sunday morning. The organization is also sending 3,000 kits with medical supplies.

AmeriCares, which sent a team from India, was preparing shipments of medical aid and other supplies while Handicap International also focused on emergency response.

Google has opened up its Person Finder tool, a crowdsourced missing-people database. The application, first launched in 2010, gathers information from numerous sources, including emergency responders.

Singapore is sending soldiers, fire fighters and police officers, according to a statement from the country’s defence ministered. Going to Nepal will 15 medical personnel from the military, a 55 search-and-rescue team from the civil defence force and an undisclosed number of police officers.

India has sent 10 National Disaster Relief Force teams, totalling 450 personnel, according to the Indian Express.

With files from Debra Black, Laurie Monsebraaten, Ethan Lou, The Canadian Press, The Associated Press