A week after the earthquake struck Nepal there is intense frustration at the progress of the relief effort – both among a desperate public and among those trying to bring help.

In many badly affected areas – some just a few hours’ drive from the capital – survivors say they have received no help. Villagers have been reported besieging the few vehicles trying to deliver supplies.

Documents seen by The Independent on Sunday, describing meetings between international aid charities and senior government officials, reveal severe tensions, especially over demands that the Prime Minister’s office should control the operation and its funding.

The agencies appear not to trust the PM’s office to spend the money wisely or to run things smoothly. According to one NGO worker, the government appears to care only about “harvesting the golden wave” of relief aid. The death toll has climbed to more than 6,800, and the Home Ministry says hopes of finding more survivors are fading.

Powerful earthquake hits Nepal







44 show all Powerful earthquake hits Nepal





















































































1/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Victims of the earthquake are cremated at Pashupatinah Temple in Kathmandu Getty Images

2/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An elderly woman prays at a temple in Kathmandu damaged by the earthquake AP

3/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese police push back residents who began protesting after waiting for hours in line to board buses back to towns and villages Getty

4/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A Nepalese policeman guards a collapsed building in Kathmandu. The number of people killed in the earthquake has passed 5,000 according to official figures EPA

5/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A woman stands in silence in front of the historic Bal Krishna Thapa Chhetry temple in Kathmandu, which was been damaged by the earthquake EPA

6/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Rescuers from Japan in the centre of Kathmandu; they are facing a race against time to find survivors Getty

7/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Pallets of Australian aid (blankets, tarpaulins, hygiene kits and water purification tablets) are loaded onto a No. 36 Squadron C-17A Globemaster aircraft in preparation for delivery to Nepal Getty Images

8/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Rishi Khanal is rescued after being trapped in a collapsed building in Nepal’s capital following Saturday’s earthquake Reuters

9/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Villagers shelter from rain in the Gorkha district, north-west of Kathmandu; 10 days of rain are forecast, with tens of thousands of people sleeping outdoors AFP/Getty

10/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A prayer bell is seen on top of the rubble of a damaged temple after an earthquake in Kathmandu, Nepal Reuters

11/44 Earthquake hits Nepal People search through the rubble at the earthquake damaged Durbar Square in Kathmandu. Hundreds of thousands of Nepalis spent another night in the open after a massive quake which killed more than 4,000 AFP/Getty

12/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A priest prepares a fire for the cremation of an earthquake victim at Pashupati cremation center in Kathmandu, Nepal. The official death toll from the magnitude 7.8 earthquake has risen to 5,057 people EPA

13/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A Nepalese villager injured in an earthquake holds her son as they sit inside an Indian Army helicopter after being evacuated from Lapu in Gorkha AFP/Getty

14/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A satellite image showing a part of the city's historic center, left, before the 25 April 2015 earthquake and the after effects, right EPA

15/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An injured woman and her daughter receive medical treatment after arriving at Dhading hospital, in the aftermath of the earthquake, in Dhading Besi

16/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An elderly woman mourns in front of her destroyed home in the Kumalpur village, on the outskirts of capital Kathmandu

17/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Earthquake victims collect belongings and salvage food items from a destroyed building after a major earthquake, Kumalpur village, on the outskirts of capital Kathmandu

18/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A Nepalese girl injured in the earthquake holds the hand of her mother inside an Indian air force helicopter as they are evacuated from Trishuli Bazar to Kathmandu airport in Nepal

19/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese victims of the earthquake lie inside an Indian air force helicopter as they are evacuated from Trishuli Bazar to Kathmandu airport in Nepal

20/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An injured boy sleeps on the ground outside the overcrowded Dhading hospital in Dhading Besi

21/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Members of a rescue team from China huddle while planning their operation at the site of earthquake in Kathmandu

22/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Local people gather at the top of large mound where once stood a temple to view the scene of devastation in Kathmandu

23/44 Earthquake hits Nepal People pray before cremating the body of a victim of the earthquake, along a river in Kathmandu, Nepal

24/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese soldiers carry a wounded man on a makeshift stretcher to a waiting Indian air force helicopter as they evacuate victims of the earthquake from Trishuli Bazar to Kathmandu airport in Nepal

25/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An Indian Air Force person carries a Nepalese child, wounded in the earthquake, to a waiting ambulance after the child and mother were evacuated from a remote area at the airport in Kathmandu

26/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An Indian Air Force person walks carrying a Nepalese child, wounded in the earthquake, to a waiting ambulance as the mother follows after they were evacuated from a remote area at the airport in Kathmandu

27/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Indian resident Santosh (2L) is met by relatives after being evacuated following an earthquake in Nepal at the railway station in Amritsar

28/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A helicopter prepares to rescue people from camp 1 and 2 at Everest Base Camp, Nepal

29/44 Earthquake hits Nepal People carry a woman from the rubble of a destroyed building after an earthquake hit Nepal, in Kathmandu, Nepal EPA

30/44 Earthquake hits Nepal People try to free a living man from the rubble of a destroyed building after an earthquake hit Nepal EPA

31/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A man struggles to free himself from under the rubble of a destroyed building after an earthquake hit Nepal, in Kathmandu, Nepal EPA

32/44 Earthquake hits Nepal People free a man from the rubble of a destroyed building after an earthquake hit Nepal, in Kathmandu, Nepal EPA

33/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Dust can be seen over the city during an earthquake in Kathmandu, Nepal, 25 April 2015. EPA

34/44 Earthquake hits Nepal A building stands damaged after an earthquake in Kathmandu, Nepal, Saturday, April 25, 2015 AP

35/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese people walk past a collapsed building in Kathmandu on April 25, 2015. AFP/Getty Images

36/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An injured man is assisted after an earthquake caused serious damage in Kathmandu, Nepal, 25 April 2015. EPA

37/44 Earthquake hits Nepal An injured child lies on the ground outside the Medicare Hospital in Kathmandu, Nepal, Saturday, April 25 AP

38/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese health workers carry injured people into an open area following an 7.9 earthquake, at Lalitpur on the outskirts of Kathmandu on April 25, 2015. AFP/Getty Images

39/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Indian bystanders look at a collapsed house following an earthquake, in Siliguri on April 25, 2015 AFP/Getty Images

40/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Volunteers help with rescue work at the site of a building that collapsed after an earthquake in Kathmandu, Nepal, Saturday, April 25 AP

41/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese rescue members and onlookers gather at the collapsed Darahara Tower in Kathmandu on April 25, 2015. AFP/Getty Images

42/44 Earthquake hits Nepal People search for survivors stuck under the rubble of a destroyed building, after an earthquake caused serious damage in Kathmandu, Nepal, 25 April 2015. EPA

43/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Nepalese rescue members move the body of a victim from the collapsed Darahara Tower in Kathmandu GETTY

44/44 Earthquake hits Nepal Health workers take care of injured people outside the Manmohan Memorial Community Hospital after an earthquake caused serious damage in Kathmandu, Nepal EPA

The agency documents also reveal frustration with bureaucracy at the airport where relief supplies are arriving, and suggest that local officials are obstructing relief efforts.

Nepal exempted tarpaulins and tents from import taxes on Friday, but the UN resident representative, Jamie McGoldrick, told Reuters that the government had to loosen customs restrictions further to deal with the rising flow of relief material.

Monitoring reports indicate that some supplies are being distributed according to recipients’ social status rather than their need. And planners say the scale of the disaster, and the nature of the help needed, is still not fully understood.

Apart from a few cars delivering supplies, little relief traffic could be seen on the road as the three Nepali businessmen I travelled with brought daal, blankets and almost a ton of rice to the stricken Sindhupalchowk district, a few hours’ drive from Kathmandu, on Friday. Ninety households received enough rice from our hand-out to last a couple of days. But in the village of Langarche a woman who had broken her leg in the earthquake – one of more than 14,000 injured – had still not been treated.

Outside of Kathmandu, in many badly affected areas, survivors say they have received no help (AP)

The people said that what they needed most was rice and, especially, tarpaulins. The high demand for tarpaulins means they are almost unavailable in Kathmandu, and the Finance Minister, Ram Sharan Mahat, has pleaded for the international community to send more of them. Mr Mahat has also claimed in an interview that, by Friday, “not a single dollar” of the sums pledged by international donors had been placed in government accounts, although that cannot be verified.

Lying by the road in the village was a pile of supplies under tarpaulins. These had been delivered by the government the previous evening. However, the officers at the small police station there had not been authorised to distribute them, so they lay untouched.

The international organisations prefer that the relief operation be co-ordinated by “clusters” they have created to manage different tasks, with foreign officials and the Nepali government working together. However, there are concerns over how these clusters are functioning. Few Nepalis are present at these meetings, which are mainly attended by foreigners with only a few days’ experience of the country.

Another foreign official described scenes of “bedlam” where the co-ordination effort is taking place. Many of the foreign relief organisations, newly arrived in the country, are still struggling to find vehicles or drivers. Meanwhile, the government is short of helicopters, and has called for more.

John Bevan, a former senior UN official with experience in Nepal, and also in Haiti after the earthquake there, put the situation in context. He said that, despite much talk of how well-prepared the government was to cope with an earthquake, almost nothing seemed to have been put in place for dealing with the current situation.

Kathmandu residents in Durbar Square (AFP/Getty)

For example, while projections foresaw a catastrophe in densely populated Kathmandu, the actual disaster has unfolded in remote rural areas. Many of the worst-affected areas are in remote parts of the country, and there are not enough aircraft to reach the people who live there.

“It’s always going to be messy in the beginning,” said Mr Bevan. “An earthquake is bound to hit political decision-making. The military takes over as the only decision-making body. But decisions which are taken now have long-term social implications.”

More than 200 international relief organisations have flocked to Nepal. “It is tough to organise,” he said. “But if you are improvising it is impossible.”

Although urgent relief efforts have only just begun, experts say long-term plans must be made now to provide for the many thousands of displaced people.

Mr Bevan points out that many of the most needy people have by now moved far from areas where buildings have collapsed. Furthermore, the monsoon planting season is approaching. With no crops, harvest time will bring a fresh crisis.