Counsellor and mountaineer Renu Fotedar was killed in the avalanche on Mount Everest triggered by the 7.9-magnitude earthquake in Nepal, her family has said.

Fotedar, 49, was an avid climber who held dual Indian and Australian citizenship. Her family had mounted a campaign on social media to trace her after the avalanche on Saturday.

Her husband Lokesh Fotedar found her body at the base camp of Everest which was devastated by the avalanche.

Her son Tushar Fotedar tweeted late on Monday night to confirm her death.

It has been confirmed. She is no more. Please do not spread false hope based on incorrect information. It is cruel. — Tushar Fotedar (@EMusiclvr) April 27, 2015

Working with a Sherpa guide, Lokesh Fotedar spotted his wife’s body along with that of a Japanese woman mountaineer.

Renu Fotedar was in her tent at the base camp when a wall of snow washed her away, Dreamers’ Destination Treks and Expeditions managing director Temba Tsheri said.

“It so fast it was like a dream. They couldn’t do anything. There was a big sound. They didn’t get the chance to run away. There was no place to hide," Tsheri

told the Guardian

.

Sherpas told Tsheri that she had stood no chance.

Her cousin Aashish Kaul spoke in Mumbai about the tragedy that had befallen the family. "All of us kept trying to know her whereabouts and later in the evening located one of the Sherpas who accompanied her and eventually (he) led us to her body," he said.

"The entire group perished, including her campmate, a 50-year-old Japanese lady. Till that time all of us believed she was alive as she was always brave," Kaul said.

Renu Fotedar's website said she was on a 59-day Everest expedition. She had recently moved with her family to Switzerland, where she ran a business focussing on behavioural sciences and holistic healing.

She was born in a Kashmiri Pandit family and migrated from the Kashmir Valley to Udhampur after the state was hit by militancy. She later moved to Delhi to pursue academics before marrying and settling in Australia.

(With PTI inputs)