Only international airport restricted to medium and small-sized jets because sole runway cannot handle strain of large aircraft flying in to help

Nepal has been forced to close its only international airport to big aeroplanes flying in relief supplies and aid workers because its only runway is deteriorating under the weight of large aircraft.

‘No one has come’: one week on, Nepal quake victims help themselves Read more

Medium and small-size jets will still be allowed to land, officials said.

It is the latest complication in global efforts to aid people suffering after the massive earthquake on 25 April, the impoverished country’s biggest and most destructive in eight decades.

People in Nepal – both in remote villages and in Kathmandu – have complained about not seeing any rescue workers or international aid and about a lack of temporary shelters, with many sleeping out in the open because of fears of aftershocks bringing down their damaged homes.

Birendra Shrestha, the manager of Tribhuvan international airport, on the outskirts of the Nepalese capital, said bigger planes were banned because the runway was deteriorating. The runway was built to handle only medium-size jets and not the large military and cargo planes that have been flying to the airport since the 7.8-magnitude quake struck, he said.

The last week has seen a steady procession of large planes trying to fly in goods and relief workers, as well as a swarm of journalists. But the small airport has parking slots for only nine jets, and reports have emerged of cracks on the runway and other problems at the airport.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest While a small amount of aid is beginning to reach some of the areas worst hit by the earthquake, there is growing anger at the failure of the government to do more

One week after the quake, aid has been slow in reaching those who need it most. In many places, it has not come at all.

UN humanitarian officials said on Saturday that they were increasingly worried about the spread of disease. They added that more helicopters were needed to reach isolated mountain villages that were hard to access even before the quake.

The true extent of the damage from the earthquake is still unknown as reports continue to filter in from remote areas, some of which remain entirely cut off. The UN says the quake affected 8.1 million people – more than a quarter of Nepal’s 28 million people.

A graphical guide to Nepal's earthquake Read more

The government said on Sunday that the quake had killed at least 7,040 people. Laxmi Dhakal, a home ministry official, said hopes of finding survivors had faded dramatically. “Unless they were caught in an air pocket, there is not much possibility,” he said.

Nepal has been shaken by more than 70 aftershocks following the quake, and its people remain on edge. One brief aftershock on Saturday afternoon shook the only paved road in the village of Pauwathok. Residents screamed and began to run, then stopped when the tremor eased.

The small village is located in Sindhupalchowk district, where more deaths have been recorded than anywhere else in Nepal – 2,560, compared with 1,622 in Kathmandu. The UN says up to 90% of houses in Sindhupalchowk have been destroyed.