On Jan. 15, 1934 at 2.28 a.m. local time, the strongest earthquake to hit Nepal in 68 years shook the Himalayan nation, killing more than 10,000 people.

Decades later, the impact of that temblor and calculations about population growth since it took place were used to predict what would happen if a similar-sized quake hit again.

In 1998, a joint project by the National Society for Earthquake Technology in Nepal and U.S.-based nonprofit GeoHazards International said, “Simply applying the percentage of the population killed or injured in the 1934 earthquake to the population of the valley today [1998] results in an estimate of 22,000 deaths and 25,000 injuries requiring hospitalization.”

Applying more recent earthquake casualty figures from cities comparable to Katmandu results in an estimate of 40,000 deaths and 95,000 injuries in the region’s next major quake, the study, titled “The Kathmandu Valley Earthquake Risk Management Project,” said.

That next major quake happened Saturday. It had a magnitude of 7.8. The official death toll on Sunday evening stood at just over 2,400.

Earlier this month, a group of international earthquake experts and social scientists gathered in Katmandu to assess how to prepare the city better for a quake of the same magnitude as the 1934 temblor.

James Jackson, head of the department of earth sciences at the University of Cambridge, who was at the meeting, told the Associated Press that, “physically and geologically what happened is exactly what we thought would happen.”

The 1998 GeoHazard report estimated that a repeat of the shaking experienced in 1934 would cause heavy or irreversible damage to all of the buildings in the Katmandu Valley, render almost half the bridges in the valley impassable and leave 10% of paved roads with deep cracks or subsidence.

The country’s only international airport may be inaccessible,” the report predicted, adding that the extremely narrow roads, which could easily be blocked by debris, will exacerbate the problem, it added.

Katmandu airport has for the most part remained operational, receiving flights carrying rescue teams and relief supplies.

The vast majority (95%) of the water pipes and half of the pumping stations and treatment plants could incur serious damage, the report predicted.

Almost all telephone exchange buildings, 60% of telephone lines and 40% of electric lines are likely to be damaged, it added.