A 32-year-old doctor who specialises in Himalayan archaeology was said to be “absolutely terrified” and incredibly shaken after narrowly avoiding death in the devastating earthquake .

Hayley Saul, from Northampton, had left Langtang village in Kathmandu just two hours before it was completely wiped out in the quake.

As the disaster hit, she was trekking with her friend and a guide, en route to Lama Hotel, the next village on the trail.

Her sister, Emma Price, 24, said: “She had just left Langtang village and that village has gone now. The path they were trekking on had gone and they had to trek another five or six hours to get to the next village.

“Huge boulders were falling and following them, the river was blocked in places and she was worried it would flood, the cliffs were shaking with the aftershocks . It was absolutely terrifying.

“They were just on the path when it happened. She said they just ran. They were on the way down and there were rocks following them.

“The guide she was with found out that his whole family had gone. It’s some kind of apocalyptic nightmare.”

When the group got to Lama Hotel, Miss Saul left a voicemail on her sister’s mobile, pleading with her to contact the Foreign Office or the British Embassy and get helicopters sent to rescue everyone stranded there.

Mrs Price added: “They were all trapped. The communications are all down so it’s really had to get any kind of signal. They have no electricity and no way to charge their phones.

“I had a panicked 24 hours trying to get help but I couldn’t get back in touch with her to tell her I had heard the message and was doing what I could.

“They were eventually picked up by helicopter and are now at the British Embassy trying to sort flights out.”

She added: “My parents are over the moon. It’s been the most nightmarish 24 hours. We are just desperately hoping that people donate to the rescue effort to help the victims.”

Miss Saul, who had recently moved to Australia, was travelling with her friend, Emma Waterton. Both are archaeologists and were working on a project about the archaeology of the Himalayas.

They had flown out from Australia on April 10 and were due to return home next week.

Mrs Price added: “It’s a real passion of hers. She is fascinated by it and has done a lot of work about the ancient cultures and founded the Himalayan Exploration and Archaeological Research Team, a project concerning the documentation of Himalayan archaeological heritage.