India has decided to send several teams of its elite National Disaster Response Force to Nepal to coordinate Relief and Rescue Operations after the deadly earthquake which claimed over 200 lives damaging properties worth millions.

As per reports, 1 team of NDRF has left for Nepal at 3:45 pm. 5 teams at Hindon Air Force Base and 4 at Bathinda are waiting to depart. Home Minister Rajnath Singh has said that we will provide as much help as they (Nepal) want.

A 24 hour control room has been set up in New Delhi by the Ministry of External Affairs. The control room can be reached at the numbers mentioned below: +91 11 2301 2113, +91 11 2301 4104, +91 11 2301 7905

Apart from Nepal, 4 NDRF teams have moved for Northern Bihar, Muzaffarpur, Darbhanga, Supaul and Gopalganj.

Hindon Air Force Station: NDRF teams and relief material being sent to Kathmandu #earthquake pic.twitter.com/ILEhZwVuBq — ANI (@ANI_news) April 25, 2015

Earlier, Prime Minister Narendra Modi chaired a high-level meeting today, to review the situation following the major earthquake in Nepal.

The meeting was attended by Union Ministers Arun Jaitley and Rajnath Singh, the National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, the Principal Secretary Nripendra Misra, the Additional Principal Secretary P.K. Mishra, and senior officials from the Government, IMD, and NDRF.

The Prime Minister had earlier spoken to the President and Prime Minister of Nepal, and the Chief Ministers of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Sikkim and Madhya Pradesh. The Prime Minister has assured Nepal of all assistance in dealing with the aftermath of the earthquake.

The Prime Minister was briefed on the inputs regarding the extent of damage to life and property received so far from various places in India and Nepal.

The Prime Minister directed immediate dispatch of relief and rescue teams, including medical teams to Nepal, as well as to affected areas in India. He also directed that proper arrangements be made for rendering assistance in evacuation of stranded tourists.

The Union Government’s Crisis Management Committee, which met earlier today, will be meeting again later today.