Tunisia's caretaker prime minister was battling tonight to convince the nation that the interim government could lead the transition to democracy, after four opposition members quit in protest.

After only one day in existence the temporary government, designed to prepare for full democratic elections after the fall of Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali's dictatorship, was in difficulty. Three ministers in the important opposition UGTT trade union quit, including transport and labour ministers, saying they had "no confidence" in a government that still featured members of the RCD party that ruled under Ben Ali. Then the health minister, Mustapha Ben Jafaar, head of the FTDL opposition party, quit for the same reason.

Several hundred protesters, led by trade unionists and leftwing opposition parties, took to the streets of Tunis demanding that the new cabinet be purged of the old guard that had served Ben Ali. The peaceful protests were violently repressed by riot police who fired teargas into the crowd and pummelled protesters to the ground with batons and kicks. The protesters, singing the national anthem, repeatedly tried to regroup around the city and were repeatedly brutally broken up and forced to flee screaming into side streets.

"I am afraid our revolution will be stolen from me and my people. The people are asking for freedoms and this new government is not. They are the ones who oppressed the people for 22 years," said Ines Mawdud, a 22-year-old student at the demonstration. Peaceful protests calling for the RCD to be disbanded were also held in Sidi Bouzid, the city where criticism of Ben Ali's government first erupted last month, and two other towns.

In an attempt to calm a nation still under emergency measures that impose a 6pm curfew and ban gatherings of more than three people in the street, the prime minister, Mohamed Ghannouchi, tried to distance himself from the Ben Ali regime, saying there was a "new positive vibe" in the government. Tunisian television reported that Ghannouchi and the interim president, Fouad Mebazaa, had formally resigned from the RCD to try to dispel criticism that there were too many party members in the caretaker government.

Ghannouchi defended the inclusion of figures from the former regime in the cabinet, saying their expertise was crucial and "we need them in this phase". He told French radio: "Give us a chance so that we can put in place this ambitious programme of reform."

But tweaks to the coalition "unity" government could take place in the coming days, and the prime minister wants to be seen to be talking to all opposition parties. It is understood he held long talks with the Islamist party, brutally repressed under the regime and not included in the interim government. An opposition source said the prime minister had also proposed talks with the former Communist Workers' party leader, Hamma Hammami, who was arrested during the riots, but that Hammami had refused to meet him.

It was not immediately clear if the resignations would spark a chain of opposition walkouts that could bring down the government, which has 40 full and junior ministers. Tunisia's interim leaders have sought to stabilise the country after violent gun battles by militias loyal to the former dictator, looting and street protests following Ben Ali's escape to Saudi Arabia on Friday. The caretaker government will put in place new laws to allow for free and fair elections in six months' time after 23 years of authoritarian rule.

At the headquarters of the PDP opposition party, members of the party's executive committee held what one source called "very intense discussions" this afternoon but decided to stay in the government. The party felt the UGTT's decision of no confidence was "irresponsible", a committee member said.

The PDP is believed to be preparing to propose a general amnesty and demand an official separation of the RCD party from the workings of the state when the government holds its first cabinet meeting on Thursday.

The exiled opposition leader Moncef Marzouki today returned from 20 years of exile and has announced that he intends to run in the presidential elections. "Don't let anyone steal this blessed revolution from you," said Marzouki. "Don't waste the blood of our martyrs. We don't want any revenge, but we are fast with our principle that this horrible party does not return."