Now even the Tunisian police are protesting on the streets



Prime Minister promises to resign as soon as possible

Protesters back on streets as three-day mourning period for victims ends

As a further sign of chaos and the erosion of authority in Tunisia, the country's once-feared police force has staged a rally of its own.

Officers are demanding better salaries and insist they were not to blame for deaths among protesters who forced the North African country's autocratic leader to flee.

At least 2,000 police rallied in central Tunis, an epicentre of protest and clashes between youths and police that forced President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to quit the country he ruled with an iron fist for 23 years.

A Tunisian police cap is held aloft during a demonstration by officers on Bourguiba avenue in central Tunis The police officers were also upset at being held accountable for many of the deaths in Tunisia during the riots

Thousands of Tunisian police, national guard, firemen and street cleaners thronged central Tunis on Saturday, distancing themselves from the deposed president in the largest demonstration for days.

'We are innocent of the blood of martyrs,' chanted some of the police protesters.

The protest marks a turning point in the Tunisian uprising, throughout which Ben Ali loyalists in the police force fired on crowds, beat protesters with batons and shot teargas even at relatively small and peaceful gatherings.

'We came out today because we want national reconciliation,' said a policeman who identified himself as Hatem. 'Many people in the security forces were wrong... some ignorant people sullied our reputation ... People know now.'

Thousands of poice gathered in Tunis, highlighting the mess the government is facing after the president was forced to flee

It was a significant development for Tunisia, where police under Ben Ali were widely feared. The rally took place near the hulking Interior Ministry, a symbol of the dread that his regime inspired for many Tunisians.

The crowd in Avenue Bourguiba, where daily protests have been held, drew many plain-clothed and uniformed police with red armbands. They were pressing demands including the creation of a union, better pay and - like other protests in recent days - the ousting of any members of Ben Ali's party from the government.

Officers climbed on to their official cars, blew their whistles and waved flags and signs. Some exchanged hugs to congratulate each other about their chance to protest. Many were joined by their families.



A man makes a V-sign as a policeman stands at attention during the demo, which officers used to demand better pay and more respect

'I am not afraid to come down to the street,' said Rida Barreh, 30, who has been an internal security officer for five years.

'I work 12 hours a day and yet only get paid 500 dinars (£218) a month.'

He said he wanted a union to help defend police officers' interests and wanted to convince Tunisians in general that'"we are here for the people and we want to serve the people'.

'The government always made sure the people were scared of us but this must end,' he said. 'Also I don't want the blood of our martyrs on my hands.'

Another officer, Nabil Jazeeri, said: 'We need to forget the past and realise there is no home in Tunis that doesn't have a police officer or a man serving in the army.'

For the first time, civilians in the crowd argued openly with some police.

Tunisia's interior minister has said 78 people have been killed since the start of the demonstrations, but the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights put the number at 117, including 70 killed by live fire.

Tunisians were back on the street today to make the third day of a mourning period for the victims killed during the riots

Ben Ali, who was interior minister when he ousted Tunisian independence leader and long-time president Habib Bourguiba in 1987, had long used the police and internal security forces as a blunt tool of repression.

Tunisians interviewed in recent weeks have said repeatedly that they feared the interior ministry's officers the most.