TUNIS — Tunisia’s interim government on Thursday purged almost all the cabinet ministers left over from the government of the ousted dictator Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, bowing to two weeks of mounting street protests against the cabinet’s continued dominance by the old governing party and resolving an impasse that had threatened to bog down the new government.

Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi, Mr. Ben Ali’s former right-hand man, announced the changes in a televised address, but he himself did not resign. He reiterated a pledge to guide the country to free and fair elections within six months and then retire from government.

“This is a temporary government with a clear mission — to allow a transition to democracy,” Mr. Ghannouchi said.

From the initial reaction in the streets of Tunis, the capital, protesters welcomed the change, even though Mr. Ghannouchi held on to his position. Many protesters had said they felt their revolution was incomplete while so many familiar faces still ran important ministries like defense, interior and foreign affairs. The prime minister’s announcement appeared to end a prolonged standoff between the interim government and demonstrators who have besieged his office.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Hundreds of protesters from the impoverished southern regions of the country arrived in Tunis last weekend and set up camp in a square of the old city flanked by the prime minister’s headquarters and other government offices. They had vowed not to leave until the government stepped down, and when Mr. Ghannouchi announced the resignations a cheer went up from the crowd.

Photo

In recent days, the protests have grown newly tense as the people sleeping outside the prime minister’s office grew exhausted and rumors of an impending shake-up moved through the crowd. On Wednesday, the police resorted to tear gas to control the unruly crowd and soldiers fired shots in the air. Thousands of people marched in the rain through Bourguiba Boulevard in the center of the city on Thursday to demand again that the government be broken up, and the protests were expected to escalate when crowds emerge from prayers on Friday.