Reddit Videos » Favorites » el général, the voice of Tunisia, english subtitles collect Pop Up | Full Screen | Stealth | Download | Flag / Broken « » Hide comments Add to Queue login to enable video tracking Want ad free browsing? Upgrade your account to PRO! Video Information

reddit Bookmarked by: Bookmark Date: 15 Jan, 2011 Source Link: www.youtube.com Permission: Public Description:

Why are you worried? Would you tell me something? Don't be afraid! Mr. President, today I am speaking in mame of myself and of all the people wh... ( more

Would you tell me something? Don't be afraid!



Mr. President, today I am speaking in mame of myself and of all the people

who are suffering in 2011, there are still people dying of hunger

who want to work to survive, but their voice was not heard

get off into the street and see, people have become like animals

see the police with batons, takatak they don't care

since there is no one telling him to stop

even the law of the constitution, put it in water and drink it.

Every day I hear of invented process, in spite of the servants of the state know

I see the snake that strikes women in headscarves

you accept it for your daughter?

You know these are words that make your eyes weep

as a father does not want to hurt her children

then this is a message from one of your children

who is telling of his suffering

we are living like dogs

half of the people living in filth

and drank from a cup of suffering



Mr. President your people is dead

many people eat from garbage

and you see what is happening in the country

misery everywhere and people who have not found a place to sleep

I am speaking in name of the people who are suffering and were put under the feet



Mr President, you told me to speak without fear

But I know that eventually I will take just slaps

I see too much injustice and so I decided to send this message even though the people told me that my end is death

But until when the Tunisian will leave in dreams, where is the right of expression?

They are just words ..

Tunis was defined the "green", but there is only desert divided into 2,

it is a direct robbery by force that dominated a country

without naming already everybody knows who they are

much money was pledged for projects and infrastructure

schools, hospitals, buildings, houses

But the sons of dogs have already fattened

They stole, robbed, kidnapped and were unwilling to leave the chair

I know that there are many words in the heart of the people but don't come out

if there was not this injustice I would not be here to say these things



Mr. President your people is dead

many people eat from garbage

and you see what is happening in the country

misery everywhere and people who have not found a place to sleep

I am speaking in name of the people who are suffering and were put under the feet



Originally collected by fetching... (less) Why are you worried?Would you tell me something? Don't be afraid!Mr. President, today I am speaking in mame of myself and of all the peoplewho are suffering in 2011, there are still people dying of hungerwho want to work to survive, but their voice was not heardget off into the street and see, people have become like animalssee the police with batons, takatak they don't caresince there is no one telling him to stopeven the law of the constitution, put it in water and drink it.Every day I hear of invented process, in spite of the servants of the state knowI see the snake that strikes women in headscarvesyou accept it for your daughter?You know these are words that make your eyes weepas a father does not want to hurt her childrenthen this is a message from one of your childrenwho is telling of his sufferingwe are living like dogshalf of the people living in filthand drank from a cup of sufferingMr. President your people is deadmany people eat from garbageand you see what is happening in the countrymisery everywhere and people who have not found a place to sleepI am speaking in name of the people who are suffering and were put under the feetMr President, you told me to speak without fearBut I know that eventually I will take just slapsI see too much injustice and so I decided to send this message even though the people told me that my end is deathBut until when the Tunisian will leave in dreams, where is the right of expression?They are just words ..Tunis was defined the "green", but there is only desert divided into 2,it is a direct robbery by force that dominated a countrywithout naming already everybody knows who they aremuch money was pledged for projects and infrastructureschools, hospitals, buildings, housesBut the sons of dogs have already fattenedThey stole, robbed, kidnapped and were unwilling to leave the chairI know that there are many words in the heart of the people but don't come outif there was not this injustice I would not be here to say these thingsMr. President your people is deadmany people eat from garbageand you see what is happening in the countrymisery everywhere and people who have not found a place to sleepI am speaking in name of the people who are suffering and were put under the feetOriginally collected by Embed: URL: Tags: el général english Collected by 2 users: Related Stories from Reddit.com: