In the cases where the review board found that he had abused his authority, though, the Police Department sent him back out on the street with minimal punishment.

With some questions about Officer Pantaleo’s past seemingly addressed by the leaked documents, the conversation has shifted to broader questions about policing and transparency, as city officials continue to argue that state law bars them from disclosing information about officer misconduct. Last summer, the Police Department cited the law when it reversed its decades-old practice of regularly posting information in precinct houses and at its headquarters about the disciplining of officers.

Despite the revelations in Officer Pantaleo’s published records, Cynthia Conti-Cook, a staff lawyer for the Legal Aid Society, said it was still unclear how vigorously the department had responded to what she said were warning signs about Officer Pantaleo that dated from before his confrontation with Mr. Garner.

“If this information was universally accessible, we wouldn’t need to speculate,” Ms. Conti-Cook said. “We could compare officers’ substantiated C.C.R.B. complaints according to their precinct, rank and activity. But because the city insists on keeping this secret, we are left in the dark.”

The published records showed that Officer Pantaleo had amassed several complaints of improper conduct in the years before he confronted Mr. Garner, whose death unleashed widespread anger across the country about police conduct in black communities.

The Civilian Complaint Review Board found enough evidence to substantiate four claims that Officer Pantaleo had abused his authority, according to the records published by ThinkProgress. The only disciplinary action Officer Pantaleo ever faced from the Police Department was additional training and the loss of two vacation days, the records show.

A board official on Tuesday confirmed that the eight case numbers in the file published online, encompassing 18 allegations from 2009 to 2014, were real and that all but one of the cases had been closed. But the official, Jerika Richardson, would not say if the documents were authentic or if the cases had involved Officer Pantaleo.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At a news conference on Wednesday on a separate topic, Police Commissioner James P. O’Neill said the disclosure of the records was improper and illegal.

Photo

Officer Pantaleo is among 738 current New York police officers who have amassed at least two complaints in which an allegation was substantiated, according to city data also cited by ThinkProgress. Ninety percent of officers currently on the force have never received a complaint with a substantiated allegation, the data show. Police reform advocates say this reflects the high bar for allegations to be found credible.

Officer Pantaleo, who had been on the force for eight years when Mr. Garner, 43, died on July 17, 2014, remains on desk duty. The Justice Department has been conducting a civil rights inquiry into the death.

Mr. Garner’s final words — “I can’t breathe,” spoken 11 times — became a rallying cry for demonstrators protesting the police killings of unarmed men in cities across the country. The demonstrations gained steam after a grand jury convened by the Staten Island district attorney’s office found in December 2014 that Officer Pantaleo had not committed a crime.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Two of the substantiated allegations in the leaked documents stem from a 2012 street stop that resulted in disciplinary action against Officer Pantaleo. Information about those allegations was confirmed last year by the Police Department and reported by DNAinfo.

Another set of allegations against Officer Pantaleo that were found to be credible involved a vehicle stop and search in 2011.

Eric Sanders, a lawyer and former city police officer, cautioned that a list of civilian complaints offered only a limited window into an officer’s behavior and shortcomings, without an understanding of the circumstances of each allegation, including the kinds of crimes committed in the neighborhoods where the complaints were made.

Mr. Sanders added that the number of complaints against Officer Pantaleo was relatively modest. “This is lightweight compared to some of the stuff I’ve seen,” he said.

As commissioner, Mr. O’Neill makes the final decision on how officers will be disciplined after receiving recommendations from either the review board or an administrative judge within the Police Department. But critics have pointed out that police commissioners have sometimes imposed softer penalties than recommended.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

”As I’ve been going through the cases, I haven’t strayed too far,” Mr. O’Neill told reporters on Wednesday. “There have been a couple of times, a couple of instances, where I take a look at what the police officer does, and based on my 35 years as a police officer, sometimes the penalty goes up, and sometimes the penalty goes down.”

Mayor Bill de Blasio, who is running for re-election this year, has been questioned about his commitment to police reform and has called for changing the state law that officials say bars the release of police disciplinary records. At the same time, the city’s Law Department is still seeking to reverse the court ruling that sided with the Legal Aid Society in its efforts to obtain Officer Pantaleo’s records.

The New York Civil Liberties Union is fighting a separate case in state court seeking decisions from internal police trials against officers, which the city argues should also be kept secret.

“It’s time for the city to come clean on police misconduct,” said Christopher T. Dunn, the associate legal director for the civil liberties group.

Tina Luongo, who leads the criminal practice at the Legal Aid Society, said that for victims of police abuse, the revelations about Officer’s Pantaleo’s disciplinary history only reinforced that the department’s disciplinary system was toothless.

Even as Mr. de Blasio has emphasized the need to improve police-community relations, Ms. Luongo said, his administration has fought to shield basic information about the city’s treatment of officers: who is charged, who is disciplined, who is terminated — and who is not.

“We’re not getting this information, because they don’t want people to know and understand the level of aggression and infractions that many of the officers have,” she said. Officer Pantaleo’s disciplinary record, she added, exposed “the whole culture of, ‘We don’t really discipline, we suggest training, maybe you lose a vacation day or two but even if we suspend you, you get overtime.’”