Four emergency-service workers who found a man unconscious on the sidewalk after a cop put him in a chokehold — and apparently did nothing to aid him — have been barred from going on any more ambulance calls pending a probe, officials said Sunday.

A seven-minute video captured the last few minutes of diabetic dad Eric Garner’s life — and the apparent procedural lapses by two medics and two EMTs, sources told The Post.

“It was pretty obvious this patient was in distress,” a source said. “His body was limp and lifeless.”

Yet none of the workers — nor the eight cops on hand — can be seen in the video administering any aid to Garner. One medic at Garner’s side doesn’t even have any of the required equipment on her, such as an oxygen bag or a defibrillator, the source said.

“You can [only] hear her say, ‘Oh, he can’t walk to the bus?’ ” the source said.

Garner should have been immediately placed on a stretcher, and his airway, breathing and circulation checked, sources said. Instead, EMT Nicole Palmeri can be seen only checking for a pulse. She never uses a stethoscope to check his lungs for air movement, a source said, nor does she connect him to an oxygen mask.

“Maybe the EMT felt a pulse, but it was obvious this male was in serious distress and needed to be assisted with his breathing,” the source said.

Garner died of cardiac arrest en route to the hospital.

Palmeri and the other emergency workers are employed by Richmond University Hospital on Staten Island, but dispatched by the FDNY, which issued the restriction.

Palmeri did not return a phone message seeking comment.

Garner — who was 6-foot-5, about 350 pounds and suffered from asthma — was suspected of illegally peddling cigarettes when cops approached him at around 5 p.m. Thursday.

Undercover Officer Daniel Pantaleo was caught on video putting him in a chokehold — a violation of NYPD procedure.

Pantaleo has been named in two civil-rights lawsuits, one of which was settled by the city for $30,000, the Staten Island Advance reported Sunday. Pantaleo and three other officers unlawfully stopped a vehicle and strip-searched two men.

Pantaleo, who has been stripped of his badge and weapon, did not return requests for comment.

State NAACP President Hazel Dukes said, “Communities of color are sick and tired of this familiar story. Mr. Garner is one of too many New Yorkers who have unjustly had their lives cut short by police officers.’’

Additional reporting by Kirstan Conley, Kevin Sheehan, Priscilla DeGregory and Rebecca Harshbarger