The arrest and death of Mr. Garner, a 350-pound man whom the police accused of selling untaxed cigarettes, was captured in a video taken by a bystander’s cellphone. In the days after, Mr. Bratton said the video appeared to show a chokehold and promised a sweeping review of the department’s training.

“It was not a chokehold,” Mr. Lynch said, flanked by numerous leaders of the unions representing officers and sergeants, as well as lawyers representing Officer Pantaleo. “It was bringing a person to the ground the way we’re trained to do to place him under arrest. You put your arm on them and bring them down.”

Standing alongside Mr. Lynch, the head of the union representing police sergeants, Edward D. Mullins, called on his members to avoid problems by supervising every arrest, potentially slowing police response across the city. He said the use of the term “chokehold” by the office of the chief medical examiner amounted to politics.

The comments quickly rippled through the upper echelons of the de Blasio administration, which has moved to prevent anger over Mr. Garner’s death from driving a wedge between the department and minority communities that supported the mayor’s election last year.

Mayor Bill de Blasio brushed off suggestions of a work slowdown by officers, or political motivations of the medical examiner. “The rank and file are here to do their job, and they will do their job,” he told reporters.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. de Blasio again defended a “broken windows” approach to policing, strongly associated with Commissioner Bratton, that targets minor offenses in order to prevent larger ones. “That’s what the people of this city want, because it helps keep crime low.”

Mr. Lynch said the union would be able to line up use-of-force experts who would state that Officer Pantaleo’s grip on Mr. Garner did not amount to a chokehold. Officer Pantaleo is “a good police officer,” who Mr. Lynch said has made well over 200 arrests in his eight-year career. “Look, he’s distraught over the fact that there was a loss of life.”

The “broken windows” strategy has come under new scrutiny after Mr. Garner’s death.

During a public comment period at the review board meeting, several people urged the board to look at the policy of “broken windows” policing. “You’ve got to talk back to the mayor,” Michael Meyers, the head of the New York Civil Rights Coalition, said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Emery likened those comments to those of the police union. “They were almost as vituperative as you,” he said, but added that he agreed it was a “problem” that the Police Department appeared to brush off recommendations for discipline in cases where complaints were backed up by the board’s investigation.

Ten chokehold complaints since 2009 have resulted in recommendations of serious discipline from the review board. In each completed case, the police commissioner at the time, Raymond W. Kelly, opted for a lesser punishment or no punishment.

“There has been, I would say, a disappointing response in the past with Commissioner Kelly,” Mr. Emery said. “I fully expect that to change in the future when we substantiate cases.”

He said a study going back over 1,128 chokehold complaints to the agency since 2009 would be completed by late August or early September. Another study by the board into complaints from people who record officers on the job and then face “negative” reactions is also underway.

“Ultimately, the final arbiter is the police commissioner,” Stephen Davis, the department’s top spokesman, said of the handling of punishments. “Bratton has good experience in this area. He knows Richard Emery a long time. We intend to work together.”