We speak to Page May, teacher and co-founder of the Chicago based group Assata’s Daughters, about Black Youth Project 100, protesting on Martin Luther King day, getting organised and most importantly, getting free.

Tell us about how and why Assata’s Daughters came into existence?

In many ways it began with the idea of establishing the legitimacy of black only spaces. In that regards the Chicago chapter of Black Youth Project 100 was very important in leading the way – Assata’s Daughters could not exist if BYP 100 had not done that work. We felt that there are just not that many groups which are both intentionally black only, and also radical. The specific spark really began with the protests after the cop who killed Eric Garner was not indicted. In Chicago there were a couple of protests organised mainly by old white people, and that was fine. But I felt at the time that there is a very important, tangible difference when protests are organised by the people or communities affected. So I reached out to some friends and said ‘let’s just do our own.’ I reached out to some young people I knew through teaching and around 20 of them came to the organising meeting. And it was so beautiful. They had so much insight and so much to say – they had such an important perspective which we need in our movements. We had the protest on Martin Luther King day – which has become this whitewashed, sanitized thing – we went from the kids school to the juvenile detention centre. It was remarkable – we had around 700 kids protesting and the young people inside the detention centre were jumping up and down and banging on the windows. I just wept. It was one of the most powerful things I’ve ever been a part of. That solidified for me that young people need organisation. I believe in organisation. I don’t think they can do it on their own, they need support and mentoring. So from that I thought it would be worth the time to develop an inter-generational organisation exclusively focused on mentoring black women and girls. We started meeting in March 2015, and now we have 68 members in Chicago. We are only based in Chicago. Of these 68 members, 40 are 19 years old or under. The main point is all members are active and involved – it’s about quality not quantity. It’s not easy to join. We work really hard. We are aiming for long-term, meaningful growth – in 5 years maybe we’ll have about 100 people.

It’s our duty to fight for our freedom

What’s your overarching objective as a group? Our overarching goal is to develop a collective of black women and girls which gives them the confidence and skills to be brilliant organisers. We are informed by the Black Panther Party experience – the way they provided free food clubs, as well as teaching ideas to young people, imagining a world without police and prisons. So with Assata’s Daughters you can get a really great dinner and then study the Black Panther 10 point programme. We added an extra point, which is the right to self-determination for gender and sexuality, which is something we think was missing from the Black Panther programme. The core of our programme is developing the confidence and organising skills of these young women and girls. But we have also opened up our space to the wider community. We have a centre in the South Side of Chicago which is a meeting space but also a farm where we can grow food. We’re never going to sell anything. Everything will be free. We hope to fill it with beautiful art, and have a library and computer lab. It’s a space which is offering things that the state is not providing for people. At the moment we’ve got a young boy who got suspended from school because he’s too smart and finds it boring, and he spends all his time in our community garden with the watering can, helping things grow. With the young women and girls at the core of the programme, the goal is that they stay with us and ultimately replace us. It’s about building a cohort, of people who know each other really well, and might leave Chicago at some point and be scattered but hopefully always feel connected. That’s how we are going to get free. It takes a long time to learn this stuff. This is what will save us, more than the high-profile protests and shutdowns that we do. There are important in the moment, but it means a lot less than this long term work we are doing. We are aiming to build a strong community network, so that when the next police shooting happens – we can say to the community ‘hey, come protest with us.’ Why did you choose to name the group after Assata Shakur? It has different meanings for different people. For me the popular chant which comes from her words ‘it’s our duty to fight for our freedom’ – had a huge politicising influence on me. I feel those words are a part of who I am. Her poetry also inspired me. In particular the poems Love and Leftover. Love was written to her unborn daughter when she was in prison. The idea that she could write that in the most dehumanising, horrifying place is amazing to me. She showed that in the belly of the beast, you can still create love for someone you still haven’t even met. Leftover is about not just the horrors of the world, but our own flaws, our own mistakes. The fact we all have so much unlearning and new learning to do. Once we have gone through these mistakes and flaws and unlearning Assata asks in the poem ‘what is left?’ – and then she writes: I am in love with

losers and laughter.

I am in love with

freedom and children.

Love is my sword

and truth is my compass.

What is left? That is it for me. It’s not about celebrity, it’s not about having all the answers or being the dopest, it’s about acting out of love for your people and a commitment to truth. There no rule book. There is nothing else. Let that love be your truth and let it guide you. In order to use her name as an organisation, we have to really understand and think through what she did and stood for. The word ‘daughters’ is important. We aren’t expecting people to be mini-Assata’s. To be a daughter is to be guided and mentored, but ultimately to find your own way.