STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- The EMTs and paramedics who responded to Eric Garner after he was brought to the ground by a police officer's chokehold Thursday have been suspended without pay by Richmond University Medical Center, the hospital confirmed on Monday.

The FDNY announced over the weekend that two EMTs and two paramedics from RUMC who responded to the scene would be barred from responding to 911 calls pending an investigation and review of the incident.

On Monday, a RUMC spokeswoman confirmed that the hospital would be conducting its own review, through a "quality assurance process."

The emergency workers "are suspended without pay while the investigation continues as they are placed on operational restriction. This restriction means they are not working at this hospital or throughout the 911 system. Richmond University Medical Center continues to fully cooperate as this matter is under investigation," according to a statement by the hospital.

The decision was made after video surfaced showing one of the responding EMTs - identified in the New York Post as Nicole Palmeri - taking Garner's pulse but apparently doing little else for about two minutes before Garner is hoisted onto a stretcher.

At the video's four-minute mark, she checks his wrist for a pulse, then puts her hand on the side of his neck before telling gathered police officers, "Yeah."

"Sir, it's EMS. C'mon, we're here to help, all right. We're here to help you. We're getting the stretcher, all right," she tells Garner, who's unresponsive in the video.

Garner, 43, was taken to Richmond University Medical Center, West Brighton, where he was pronounced dead.

Police said Garner went into cardiac arrest while they attempted to place him under arrest on charges of selling untaxed cigarettes. The city medical examiner's office has not yet ruled his cause of death, and the NYPD officer who was seen on video placing Garner into a chokehold has been stripped of his badge and gun and placed on modified duty.

Israel Miranda, president of Local 27 of the Uniformed EMT and Paramedics, said that responding emergency personnel should have provided Garner with supplemental oxygen, even if he had a pulse. Miranda's union represents FDNY EMS personnel, but not RUMC EMTs.

Miranda made particular note of Garner's words to cops, captured on video, "I can't breathe! I can't breathe!"

Said Miranda, "Knowing that he's saying he's having trouble breathing, at this point, you're going to be giving him oxygen."

An EMT could also insert an airway tube into a patient's mouth that's attached to a bag to assist breathing.

One veteran EMS source questioned why the responding EMTs didn't bring any equipment when they arrived on the scene.

"She should have either put him on oxygen or put an airway in his mouth," the source said. "They were there for four and a half minutes and they did none of that."

The source also questioned the way the EMT looked for Garner's pulse, noting that a check near the carotid artery would be performed "to the left or the right of the trachea, not on the side of the neck."

Otherwise, the source said, "You're feeling your own pulse in your hand."