fullscreen continue view fullscreen close

Amid cries for justice after a Staten Island man died during an arrest, the New York City Police Department announced that one of the police officers involved in the arrest had his gun and badge removed.

The police issued a statement, "Police Officer Daniel Pantaleo has been place on Modified Assignment pending further investigation into the July 17, 2014 incident involving Eric Garner in the 120 Precinct." Previously, it was announced that Pantaleo, an eight-year veteran, would be placed on desk duty along with Police Officer Justin Damico, a four-year veteran.

Police claim that Eric Garner, 43, was selling untaxed cigarettes and that the officers attempted to handcuff him around 4:45 p.m. on Thursday outside 202 Bay Street in Tompkinsville. A disturbing video obtained by the Daily News shows Garner arguing with the police: "I was just minding my own business. Every time you see me you want to mess with me. I’m tired of it. It stops today!" When a number of cops try to subdue him, Garner, who weighed 350 pounds, is seen swatting their hands away and saying, "Don’t touch me, please."

As Pantaleo puts him in a chokehold, other officers struggle to pull him to the ground and get his arms behind his back. Garner, an asthmatic, can be heard repeatedly saying, "I can't breathe." The NYPD says he went into cardiac arrest and was pronounced dead at Richmond University Medical Center.

Pantaleo was the officer who placed Garner in the chokehold. Sources tell the Post and Daily News that the Medical Examiner has found no signs of damage to Garner's neck bones or windpipe.

It's unclear whether Panataleo will be criminally charged, and Eugene O'Donnell, professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, told the Post, "If you’re the defense counsel in this case, this is very good news, because it’s consistent with what appears to be the case — that they didn’t mean to hurt him"

However, the News reports, "Another source said the likely cause of death will be a heart attack, although other actions — including the illegal takedown of Garner — 'will probably go down as contributing factors.'"

Chokeholds are prohibited by the NYPD. Another video shows that Garner was left handcuffed for minutes while apparently not breathing:

At a rally at his National Action Network yesterday, the Rev. Al Sharpton said, "Let me tell you. This is going to be a real test to see where policies are in the city now, and whether the change that we feel has occurred, has occurred." Garner's widow, Esaw Garner, was so overcome by emotion that she had to be carried off the stage.

Later, Sharpton joined Garner's relatives and others for a march in Staten Island. According to Business Insider, they shouted, "How do you spell racist? N-Y-P-D!" "No justice, no peace! No racist police!" and "N-Y-P-D! No more killing!"

Sharpton also said, '"If you say we just out here making trouble, just go to the tape! My message to the D.A. and the federal authorities is: Go to the tape! ... The tape speaks for itself! The whole world is looking at Staten Island!"