SOUTH BEND – Social statements are rare within the framework of Notre Dame athletics. But when one happens, it gets plenty of attention.

With the blessings of university administration and the coaching staff, Irish women’s basketball players wore “I Can’t Breathe” T-shirts during pre-game warm-ups before Saturday’s home game against Michigan. The players joined other athletes who have drawn attention to recent incidents involving police and African-Americans, and they garnered national buzz nearly instantaneously, thanks to social media.

The idea at Notre Dame originated from sophomore player Taya Reimer. It gained steam thanks to the urging of coach Muffet McGraw.

“Notre Dame is a place that has always fought for social justice,” McGraw said after the game. “In my office, I have a picture of (president emeritus) Father (Theodore) Hesburgh with Martin Luther King, arm-in-arm, in the fight for civil rights.”

McGraw also said she wants her players to learn lessons about life, not just basketball.

“I want to have strong, confident women who are not afraid to use their voice and take a stand. I don’t ever want them to be victims. I’m really proud of what they did today,” she said. “Hopefully, it’s something that will catch fire and that people across the country will start to think about, ask themselves, look in the mirror and say: What are you willing to fight for?”

The shirts, black with white lettering that read “I Can’t Breate,” quote the final words of Eric Garner, who died in July after he was put in a choke hold by New York police during an arrest. The shirts are also meant to draw attention to other recent confrontations involving police and African-Americans.

Chicago Bulls star Derrick Rose was among those starting the movement within the athletic forum, wearing the T-shirt last Saturday during pre-game warmups. Since then, several athletes and teams, including Georgetown University’s men’s team, have followed suit.

McGraw said the fact that she and her assistants wore black Saturday was not a coincidence. It was in support of the players’ decision.

Reimer said Natalie Achonwa, a former Irish player who is now working with the program, had the T-shirts printed. The players paid for the shirts on their own.

“We’ve all been talking about it,” Reimer said. “We thought wearing these shirts for the game would be a cool way for us to show our support, give our condolences to all the families who have lost someone.”

Before the final horn sounded in Notre Dame’s 70-50 win over Michigan, the statement had made the rounds on social media.

“It’s not an anti-law enforcement, anti-anything message,” Reimer said. “It’s just showing condolences for the families.”

But while the move drew praise from various corners of the country, it also drew fire from several critics who said they were disappointed in the team and disapproved of the players’ stance on the controversial issues being debated today. They also lambasted the university for allowing the players to wear the shirts.

“Shame on the administration and coaches. Political statements do not belong in college sports,” one person wrote on the Tribune’s Facebook page.

Notre Dame athletic director Jack Swarbrick, however, said he “was very happy that they had a broader perspective and wanted to do this.”

“You want students at your university to be passionate about things, to be engaged in conversations about social issues,” he said. “If there’s anything I worry about, it’s that our students get too focused on the athletic side of it, and don’t do enough of the other things.”

Swarbrick added that Notre Dame has a history of being involved in “social justice and civil rights.”

“If all we’re doing is teaching them to play sports, we’re missing the boat,” he said. “We want to create an environment where they make decisions like this.”

———

©2014 the South Bend Tribune (South Bend, Ind.)

Visit the South Bend Tribune (South Bend, Ind.) at www.southbendtribune.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC