

STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- A new seven-minute cell phone video posted to Facebook shows Eric Garner lying handcuffed and unresponsive on the ground while police officers wait for an ambulance to arrive.

One officer asks the woman filming to back away and give Garner air, another checks his pulse and a third offers a supportive pat on the back while saying, "C'mon guy, breathe in, breathe out, all right," to the seemingly lifeless Garner. None of the eight cops seen in the video provide him medical help.

An emergency responder, who arrives about four minutes in, takes his pulse and tries to rouse Garner, saying, "Sir, it's EMS. C'mon, we're here to help, all right. We're here to help you. We're getting the stretcher, all right." Afterward, an officer can be heard saying, "He's breathing, he's got a pulse."

Around the 6-minute mark, officers roll Garner onto his back and lift his body onto a stretcher.

"Why nobody do the CPR?" one onlooker asks, as Garner is wheeled away.

"Cause he's breathing," an officer responds.

Garner, a 43-year-old father of six, was taken to Richmond University Medical Center, West Brighton, where he was pronounced dead. Police have said Garner went into cardiac arrest while they were attempting to arrest him on suspicion of selling untaxed cigarettes. A separate cell phone video taken as the scene unfolded shows an officer putting Garner in an apparent chokehold and dragging him to the pavement with the help of other officers.

It's unclear whether the lack of medical aid provided by police, who can be seen checking Garner's pockets and ultimately removing a cell phone and three packs of cigarettes, was appropriate given the circumstances.

Toward the end of the new video, the camera hones in on Daniel Pantaleo, the plainclothes officer who took Garner down with an apparent chokehold prior to him losing consciousness.

Pantaleo, who can be seen in the background throughout the video chatting with an officer while police attend to the unconscious Garner, waves mockingly at the camera.

"They have the nerve to wave," the woman taking the video says.

Pantaleo, an eight-year veteran of the force, was stripped of his badge and gun and placed on modified assignment, the NYPD announced Saturday.