WASHINGTON, D.C.-- Several members of Eric Garner's family gathered early Saturday morning in downtown Brooklyn to get on the bus down to Washington, D.C. for the Justice For All March.

They got a late start when their 5 a.m. bus didn't leave New York City until about 6:30 a.m., but the ride down to the nation's capital was light and fun.

Some slept, some chatted, while the adrenaline kept a few of them awake during the nearly four-hour ride.

Gwen Carr, Garner's mother, didn't take the bus and flew down to Washington, D.C. that morning.

"The mood on the bus was actually joyful and happy because we were coming to make a difference and to make history," said Garner's cousin, Benjamin Lawton. "We wanted to make sure he didn't die in vain."

Garner's daughters, Erica and Emerald Garner, his wife, Esaw Garner, and his stepfather, Ben Carr, all made the trip and joined the families of Michael Brown and Akai Gurley for the rally demanding justice and equality for all, sponsored by National Action Network, NAACP and the National Urban League.

Police estimated 5,000 people participated in the rally.

Ms. Carr, Erica and Emerald Garner, and Cynthia Davis, the president of the Staten Island chapter of NAN, marched with their arms interlocked from Freedom Plaza to the Capitol Building.

"I'm overwhelmed by all the support today," Carr said as he marched down Pennsylvania Avenue. "I hope it makes a difference. I want to see some of the laws changed. And I want all the cops and EMS workers prosecuted for what they did to Eric."

When the family made it to the stage, they put on gray sweatshirts with the words "I can't breathe" in black letters. They also wore buttons with the same slogan and pictures of Garner. The back of the sweatshirt read "12/13/14 Washington, D.C. Protest Fighting Racial Injustice."

Ms. Carr, Erica Garner and Garner's widow led a chant of "I can't breathe!" after they spoke at the podium. Erica reiterated her belief that there should be special prosecutors for the grand juries investigating police officers when she was on stage.

A Staten Island special grand jury declined to indict officer Daniel Pantaleo in connection with Garner's chokehold death on July 17 in Tompkinsville.

"It was very emotional," Ms. Carr said after she got off stage. "It couldn't have been more perfect. We're still hoping for justice so we can have some closure. Everyone who had anything to do with my son's death should be held accountable."

During the march, complete strangers from all over the country stopped to express their condolences to the family and others just gave Ms. Carr a big hug.

One little girl stopped to get Erica to sign her poster and took a quick picture of the two.

"This is going to bring awareness," Erica said. "I'm overwhelmed by all the support. The other day someone sent me a video from Japan and it said 'I can't breathe' in their language. I was moved to tears."