An order to crack down on the illegal sale of 75-cent cigarettes in Staten Island came directly from Police Headquarters, setting off a chain of events that ended in Eric Garner’s death, the Daily News has learned.

Chief of Department Philip Banks — the highest-ranking uniformed cop in the city — sent a sergeant from his office at 1 Police Plaza in July to investigate complaints of untaxed cigarettes being sold in the Tompkinsville neighborhood, a source close to the investigation told The News.

“(Banks) set the whole thing in motion,” the source said.

The sale of loosies had been on Banks’ radar since at least March, when it was discussed at a meeting at Police Headquarters about quality-of-life issues, a police source said.

Banks’ office also conducted surveillance on Bay St. and took pictures, one of which shows three men believed to be involved in an illegal cigarette sale. The News reviewed the photograph and Garner is not in it.

At around the same time, on March 27, a caller to the city’s 311 hotline complained about the issue, saying a group of men had been selling untaxed cigarettes, and sometimes marijuana, on Bay St. every day for the past three years, a second source said.

The caller identified one of the sellers as “a man named Eric.”

The next day, Garner was arrested for selling untaxed cigarettes, one of three pending cases before his death.

Sometime in early July, a memo was sent to the Staten Island borough command, a source said. The memo stressing the need to address quality-of-life issues was then forwarded to bosses in the 120th Precinct for “immediate attention,” according to the source.

On the afternoon of July 17, cops spotted Garner on Bay St. again. Witnesses said Garner, 43, had just broken up a fight. Cops say the 350-pound father of six was selling untaxed cigarettes.

NYPD spokesman Stephen Davis suggested there was nothing unusual about police focusing on low-level offenses. Cops routinely track chronic conditions, he said.

Explosive video shows a cop putting Eric Garner in a chokehold as he screamed: 'I can't breathe.'

“That particular area of the 120th Precinct has been the subject of numerous quality-of-life complaints and enforcement actions for months,” Davis said. “Among the specific public complaints of illegal activity in that area included the sale of untaxed cigarettes as well as open (alcohol) container and marijuana use and sale offenses.”

A high-ranking police official agreed.

“We address behavior and conditions and not people,” the official said. “That’s what we do across the city, and one of those conditions is the sale of untaxed cigarettes.”

The official said that on the day Garner died two of the five cops were told to keep an eye on precinct conditions. That included cigarette sales, open container and pot peddling.

“They were not handed a pic and told, ‘This guy is public enemy No. 1, get him.’ ”

Garner’s rap sheet includes eight arrests for possession and selling cigarettes.

“Every time you see me you try to arrest me,” Garner told Officer Daniel Pantaleo and a second cop before he was put in the chokehold, according to a video first posted by nydailynews.com. “I’m tired of it. It stops today.”

The city’s crackdown against untaxed cigarettes in Staten Island intensified on March 27 when the city’s 311 system received a complaint about individual smokes being sold in front of a clothing store on Bay St. near Victory Blvd., just four buildings down from where Garner was killed.

The caller said illegal cigarette sellers set up shop outside the 4 Brothers Clothing on Bay St. for three years and were selling loose cigarettes every day.

Depending on the time of day, marijuana was also being sold, said the caller, who rattled off the names of several suspects, including “a man named Eric,” a source said.

But Bilal Khalil, 40, the owner of 4 Brothers Clothing — who moved his business down the block over the summer — said he never complained about Garner.

“He was friend,” Khalil said. “I knew Eric. I knew him for a long time,” he added. “I would have never called the police on him.”

Other store owners on Bay St. said they didn’t complain to police about Garner or untaxed cigarette sales.

But the 311 tip made its way to Banks’ office where “the untaxed cigarette problem on Bay St.” was discussed, a source said. A day after the 311 call was made, cops arrested Garner for selling cigarettes without proper tax stamps.

Cops found him in possession of 23 sealed packs of untaxed cigarettes and one open pack, officials said. He was arrested with untaxed cigarettes again on May 7, officials said.

Then, a week before his death, Garner was “warned and admonished” about selling untaxed cigarettes, a police source said.

The city medical examiner ruled last week that Garner died of a chokehold and compressions to the chest. The manner of death was “homicide.”

The use of chokeholds has been banned by the NYPD since 1993.

The Staten Island district attorney has yet to file charges against Panteleo, who was stripped of his badge and gun shortly after Garner’s death. The second cop at the scene, Police Officer Justin Damico, has been allowed to keep his badge and gun but was placed on desk duty.

The Rev. Al Sharpton has called on prosecutors to make an arrest or hand the case over to the feds.

Rev. Al Sharpton has called for a federal probe into the July 17 death of Eric Garner. (Stephanie Keith)

Police Commissioner Bill Bratton vowed to retrain the city’s 35,000 cops after Garner’s death.

“This department clearly needs to do more training,” Bratton said.

Pat Lynch, president of the city’s largest police union, said Pantaleo didn’t put Garner in a chokehold.

“It is not a chokehold,” said Lynch, head of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association. “It was bringing a person to the ground the way we’re trained to do to place him under arrest.”

But Mayor de Blasio didn’t put much stock in Lynch’s comments.

“Union leaders will say what union leaders say — that is historic, that’s been going on for decades,” de Blasio said. “We have a job to do, we’re going to do our job. I don’t let the rhetoric of union leaders stand in the way of getting the job done.”

Garner’s devastated son was stunned to learn that the NYPD’s focus on illegal cigarette sales led to the fatal clash.

“I don’t even know what to say,” said Garner’s son Eric Snipes, 19, said on Wednesday. “I don’t even know.”

“That just messes up my head,” he said.

With Edgar Sandoval and Tina Moore

On a mobile device? Click here to watch the video.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!