Police in Berkeley used tear gas late Saturday night to break up an evening-long protest over recent incidents in which unarmed African American men were killed by police.

The episode was the culmination of a noisy, rowdy night of action through Berkeley. After more than five hours of marching and confrontations, about 400 protesters squared off against hundreds of police from Berkeley and other jurisdictions at the intersection of Telegraph Avenue and Durant Street just south of the UC Berkeley campus.

After warning the crowd of protesters, officers fired tear gas, sending people fleeing in panic and pain.

Police arrested five adults and a juvenile on unspecified allegations, said Officer Jennifer Coats, a Berkeley police spokeswoman. Coats said protesters vandalized police vehicles and threw various objects at officers, including bricks, pipes, rocks and bottles. Some threw back smoke grenades that had been lobbed by officers, she said. One officer suffered a dislocated shoulder after being hit by a sandbag, she said.

LATEST SFGATE VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing Woman hit by Sacramento sheriff's deputy vehicle during Stephon Clark protest Guy Danilowitz

The wettest and driest places in the Bay Area Ted Andersen, Alix Martichoux, SFGATE

The Regulars: The Mushroom Hacker Nani Walker, Robin Simmonds and Lauren Schwartzman

Candy Land: How West Oakland's Ocho Candy Makes Its Organic Sweet Treats Sarah Fritsche

Bernal Heights hit-and-run San Francisco Chronicle

Woman's car plunges 300 feet off cliff near Pacifica California Highway Patrol

SF Brewing Co. Ghirardelli Square Virtual Tour San Francisco Chronicle

The story behind You're Going to Die, SF's death-related open mike San Francisco Chronicle

Protesting the death of Stephon Clark: ‘You murdered a Son’ New York Times

David Nayfeld making pasta San Francisco Chronicle

But many protesters complained they were subjected to excessive force.

It wasn’t just protesters who were gassed.

Minutes before the police dispersed the crowd at about 10:30 p.m., several concerts had let out in the area. Well-dressed concertgoers waiting to pay in a nearby garage were enveloped in a cloud of stinging gas, sending them running into elevators.

“I’m not sure that’s necessary,” said Elaine Dunlap, 74, who had just attended a Paul Dresher concert at Zellerbach Playhouse. “I think people have a right to protest, certainly for an issue as big as this.”

She was sitting with her husband, Greg, tears streaming down their faces.

“I’ve never experienced that and I’m an old hippie,” she said.

Within minutes the crowd — which was joined by hundreds of UC Berkeley students out on Saturday night — re-formed a block south of Durant at Channing Way. Dozens in the group sat in front of a wall of police, chanting, “Peaceful protest.” Later, the group again squared off with officers, roaring, “Black lives matter.”

Officers told the crowd the assembly was unlawful as police pushed the group south on Telegraph. Around 1 a.m., police again fired tear gas at the protesters, sending the remaining group scattering.

The confrontations followed a night in which hundreds of people marched through Berkeley, including what police described as “splinter groups” that vandalized cars, broke windows and looted businesses.

Organizers had planned a peaceful march, but windows were broken and wine bottles smashed at a Trader Joe’s store near Martin Luther King and University Avenue, while masked looters broke into a Radio Shack store and grabbed merchandise. Protesters also broke windows at a Wells Fargo Bank.

At about 7 p.m., the Berkeley BART Station was shut down by the disturbances, with the North Berkeley station closed an hour later.

Read Full Article