By RYAN LAVIS and JOHN M. ANNESE



STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Family and friends fought back tears and demanded answers from authorities late Thursday night as they stood by a memorial where police arrested 43-year-old Eric Garner earlier that afternoon. He died shortly after being placed in handcuffs.

"He was a great dad -- he's just a warm guy," said Jewel Miller, the mother of Garner's newborn daughter.

Ms. Miller said she and Garner are separated, but he remained a loving father to his 3-month-old baby, Legacy Garner, who was born prematurely.

"He was so proud of his daughter -- she's his miracle," Ms. Miller said.

Garner died following an incident with police outside a beauty supply store at the intersection of Victory Boulevard and Bay Street in Tompkinsville at about 4:45 p.m. on Thursday.

He was pronounced dead at Richmond University Medical Center, West Brighton.

Video obtained by the Daily News shows police confronting Garner, who was taller than 6 feet and weighed at least 350 pounds. When he refused to put his hands behind his back, a plainclothes officer put him in a chokehold, the Daily News reported.

A struggle ensued and Garner was knocked to the ground, according to the video.

"All I kept hearing from him was, 'I can't breathe, I can't breathe,'" Valencia Griffin told the Advance. "He never fought back -- he didn't know why they were arresting him."

Police sources familiar with the investigation said that the officers were tying to arrest Garner because they saw him selling untaxed cigarettes, which he had done in the past.

Witnesses offered a different account of what happened from police, with several people saying that Garner was trying to break up a fight prior to police arriving on the scene.

"The cops slammed him to the ground and threw the handcuff on him," said one witness, Taisha Allen. "I saw saliva and blood coming out the side of his mouth. It was awful that something like this had to happen."

Adding, "He [Garner] was the one who broke up the fight."

Another witness said Garner was "absolutely not selling cigarettes" when police arrived.

The incident sparked calls of police brutality as residents hung handwritten posters with phrases like "no justice, no peace" and "Another innocent black man has been killed by police brutality. The NYPD must be stopped!" on telephone poles near the scene about an hour after the incident.

Friends of the victim, who knew him around the neighborhood as "Big E," quickly set up a memorial, and placed candles spelling out his nickname in front of the store where the altercation occurred.



"Everybody that knows him will tell you that he's a wonderful person," said Charlene Thomas, 64, who knew the victim from when she worked in a deli a few stores down from where Thursday's incident occurred.

"I would hug him every day. He was like a big teddy bear," she said.

Public records show Garner was out on $4,000 bond or $2,000 cash bail -- he has three pending criminal cases against him, all involving charges of possession and sale of untaxed cigarettes, from arrests in May, March and last August. In the August case, police also charged him with aggravated unlicensed operation of a vehicle, false personation and marijuana possession.

The Rev. Lloyd Land, of the First United Christian Church, described Garner as a "gentle giant" and said his death makes no sense.

"This guy was nobody's drug dealer. He doesn't drink liquor. He doesn't do drugs. What he does is he sells cigarettes," Rev. Land said. "He sells cigarettes, 50 cents a piece. That's how he makes a living."

He added, "He was a gentle giant. Insofar as violence, I don't believe if you smack him in the face he would hit you back ... The police have no reason to attack him."

Late Thursday night, Ms. Miller arrived at the scene in Tompkinsville holding their daughter, Legacy, in her arms.

"I can't believe he's gone -- his daughter has to grow up without a father now," Ms. Miller said.

A father of six children, Ms. Miller said that Garner was always willing to go out of his way for other people, despite his chronic health problems such as asthma and narcolepsy.

"You can ask him for anything -- he helped so many people in so many different ways," she said.

Adding, "I lost my best friend."