STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. Eric Garner had run afoul of the law several times for allegedly selling untaxed cigarettes before his fatal confrontation with police on Thursday, court records show.

Garner died as officers tried to arrest him in Tompkinsville on suspicion of selling illegal smokes, said police.

Cops said Garner died of a heart attack, although video shows a plainclothes officer putting him in a chokehold and bringing him to the ground.

At the time of his death, the Port Richmond resident had three misdemeanor cases pending in Stapleton Criminal Court. He was free on $2,000 bail.

On Aug. 22 of last year, Garner was arrested on School Road and Bay Street, Fort Wadsworth, for allegedly driving without a license, according to a criminal complaint.

Garner, 43, gave cops a phony name and put himself in more hot water when officers allegedly found untaxed cigarettes and a small amount of marijuana in the 1998 Lincoln Navigator he was driving, the complaint said.

He was charged with aggravated unlicensed vehicle operation, false personation, possession or sale of untaxed cigarettes and marijuana possession, according to information from District Attorney Daniel Donovan's office.

Seven months later, while out on $1,000 bail, Garner was busted on March 28 for allegedly selling unstamped cigarettes on the street outside of 200 Bay St., Tompkinsville. He had 24 packs of untaxed smokes in his possession, police said.

The location is next door to 202 Bay St., where the fatal confrontation occurred Thursday between cops and Garner.

Garner was charged with a misdemeanor count of violating the cigarette and tobacco products tax and posted $1,000 bail, online state court records show.

Garner was arrested again on May 7 on Victory Boulevard and St. Marks Place, Tompkinsville. The site is across the block from Bay Street.

Cops accused him of possessing six packs of untaxed cigarettes.

Garner last appeared in court to answer the three cases on July 2. The matters were all adjourned then to Oct. 7, online state court records show.