Oakland, S.F. protesters denounce police killing of Eric Garner

Protesters gathered in Oakland and San Francisco on Wednesday evening to call for police accountability in the wake of a grand jury declining to indict a white New York City police officer in the video-recorded choke-hold death of Eric Garner, a black man stopped for selling loose, untaxed cigarettes in July.

A crowd of hundreds gathered at 14th Street and Broadway before marching under intermittent downpours to decry the decision, which they said was just the latest injustice stemming from controversial incidents in which unarmed men of color have died at the hands of police officers who have not been charged criminally.

Satima Flaherty, 27, of Oakland, led the crowd in chants of “Justice for Eric Garner!” and “Justice for Oscar Grant!” Grant was shot and killed Jan. 1, 2009, by a BART police officer who was convicted of involuntary manslaughter after testifying the shooting was accidental.

“They’re killing us and it’s not just black people — it’s all people of color,” Flaherty said to the crowd. “Who out there is a person of color? Raise your hands. Raise your hands. It could be you. It could be you.”

The march made its way up Broadway but was blocked by a line of officers near Napa Street in the Rockridge neighborhood about 7:30 p.m. Some protesters knocked over trash cans, but others quickly picked them up as the crowd, still numbering about 100, winded through side streets to avoid police lines before returning to Broadway and heading south back toward downtown.

Video: Eric Garner decision protests in San Francisco

They eventually met at 14th Street and Broadway before again marching through the downtown. They reconvened outside Oakland City Hall before dispersing around 9:45 p.m.

A smaller group gathered around 6 p.m. at Powell and Market streets in San Francisco to stage a “die-in” near the cable car turnaround. The crowd grew as chants of “Black lives matter!” and “Jail killer cops!” rang through downtown.

As the crowd continued to grow, a line of people blocked traffic on Market Street. Muni buses, cars and bicyclists, unable to pass the human chain, stacked up in both directions on the busy thoroughfare just before 6:45 p.m.

The crowd continued to grow and a number of police vans pulled up about 8 p.m. As police put on riot gear and began to organize to clear Market Street, the rally dwindled to about 20 people who walked east on Market Street away from the officers. They were eventually moved peacefully onto the sidewalk and traffic began moving again just before 8:30 p.m., nearly two hours after protesters blocked the street.

“I came down here because I’m disgusted about what happened,” said Edward Collins, a 19-year-old student who was one of the protesters blocking the street. “It’s beyond a race thing to me. No matter what race you are, no one has the right to murder you.”

The medical examiner ruled Garner’s death a homicide and said the choke-hold was a contributing factor. Police union officials and a lawyer for the officer, Daniel Pantaleo, said Garner died as a result of poor health and a take-down maneuver taught by the department, not the choke-hold, which was banned under department policy, the Associated Press reported.

The rally in Oakland was the fourth in two weeks. The city saw three demonstrations last week after a grand jury in Missouri declined to indict Ferguson police Officer Darren Wilson in the August killing of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager. Wilson said he acted in self-defense.

Video: Oakland march for Eric Garner

All three of those protests ended with vandalism, property damage and arrests. Flaherty urged the crowd in Oakland on Wednesday night to keep the march peaceful.

“Don’t forget what we’re out here for,” she said. “We’re here for peace.”

Across the bay in San Francisco, Amber Brummell, 19, echoed those sentiments.

“Protests can do a lot, but not rioting,” said Brummell, a security guard and student at City College of San Francisco. “If we can all come together, we might just be able to turn things around.”

Vivian Ho and Kale Williams are San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. E-mail: vho@sfchronicle.com, kwilliams@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @VivianHo, @sfkale