• UK and US to send military advisers to Ukraine • US and Russia to hold talks over Ukraine crisis • White House: Putin is not 'unhinged' • Ukraine raises flag over Donetsk government HQ

02.40 We are going to wrap up our live coverage of events in Ukraine now. Thanks for joining us. For the latest developments please keep in close touch with our world news page .

02.06 Looking ahead, The UN Security Council will hold new closed-door talks tomorrow on the Ukraine crisis. Envoys from 15 member countries are due to meet at 2:30pm (1930 GMT) for the council's fourth consultations on the subject since Friday. During an acrimonious round of emergency talks on Monday, Russia told other council members that Ukraine's deposed president Viktor Yanukovych had asked Moscow to dispatch troops to re-establish law and order in his country. As a permanent member of the council, Russia holds veto power and can thus block the body's draft resolutions.

01.34 The Washington Post has an interesting op-ed by Henry Kissinger on how the Ukraine crisis ends.

01.10 Russia's RIA Novosti news agency is reporting that Crimea is planning to set up its own law enforcement and security agencies.

“We are creating our own prosecutors’ office, Interior Ministry and security service,” the speaker of the region’s parliament, Volodymyr Konstantynov, reportedly said.

00.45 Liz Wahl's resignation has raised some eyebrows on Twitter:

<noframe>Twitter: Archie Bland - Another RT presenter finds conscience at moment of maximum visibility. What did they think channel was til now? PBS? <a href="http://t.co/ZWufi3x3gS" target="_blank">http://t.co/ZWufi3x3gS</a></noframe>

00.25 Anchor Liz Wahl has explained to the Daily Beast why she resigned from her role at Russia Today live on air. RT has dismissed her announcement as a "self-promotional stunt".

23.55 Hillary Clinton has clarified her earlier comments likening Vladimir Putin to Hitler. Speaking at a UCLA event she reiterated that Mr Putin’s claims of needing to protect Russian minorities in Ukraine were “reminiscent” of claims made by the Nazis in the 1930s, but she emphasised that she was not likening the Russian president to Hitler.

“I’m not making a comparison, certainly. But I am recommending that we perhaps can learn from this tactic that has been used before. I just want everybody to have a little historic perspective,” she said.

She added that Russia’s actions in Ukraine are especially troubling given the Russian invasion of Georgia in 2008.

At the UCLA event, she called Mr. Putin a “tough guy with a thick skin,” who has a vision of a “greater Russia.”

23.25 Here is the full US state department's press release on President Putin's Ficton: 10 false claims about Ukraine.

23.17 US Secretary of State John Kerry has called on Russia to send its troops back to their bases and respect international observers after a UN special envoy was besieged inside a cafe in Crimea region by a hostile crowd

23.15 Telegraph's Moscow Correspondent Roland Oliphant reports on how Russian soldiers are blockading Ukrainian navy command ship Slavutych at the Crimean port of Sevastopol

22.56 A presenter from Russia Today has resigned live on air, saying she can't be part of Putin's whitewashing of the situation in Ukraine. Anchor Liz Wahl announced she could no longer work for the network.

As a reporter on this network I face many ethical and moral challenges... I believe in disseminating the truth and that is why after this newscast I'm resigning.

22.20 The US State Department has put out a pointed statement accusing Mr Putin of “distorting” the facts about Russia’s intervention in Ukraine.

“As Russia spins a false narrative to justify its illegal actions in Ukraine, the world has not seen such startling Russian fiction since Dostoyevsky wrote, "The formula ‘two plus two equals five" is not without its attractions’.”

22.00 The White House has released a readout from the call between Mr Obama and Mr Cameron:

As part of our continuing close consultations on shared security challenges, the President spoke to Prime Minister Cameron today regarding the events unfolding in Ukraine The leaders expressed their grave concern over Russia’s clear violation of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity, and both noted that the current circumstances are unacceptable. Russia has already started to pay a cost for its actions, such as reducing investor confidence in Russia. The two leaders welcomed the military observer mission being undertaken by Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe at the request of the Government of Ukraine. They also discussed support for the government of Ukraine as it works to stabilize its economy and makes preparations for elections in May. The leaders agreed to stay in close contact in the days ahead.

21.45 Barack Obama has called David Cameron to discuss the situation in Ukraine. Details of the call to come.

Wounded participant of an anti-war rally reacts during clashes with pro-Russian demonstrators in Donetsk. (Reuters)

21.13 Yulia Tymoshenko, Ukraine's recently-released former prime minister, has urged the West to ramp up pressure on Russia to force it to withdraw troops from Crimea.

"It is up to them [the U.S. and the UK] to choose the methods to stop the aggressor. But they must do it immediately," Tymoshenko said at her office in downtown Kiev. The West must do "everything that will stop the aggressor. Period."

21.07 UN envoy Robert Serry was accosted by a group of armed men outside the naval headquarters in Simferopol who shouted "Crimea is Russian! Putin! Putin!"0

19.18 Ukraine-Russia tensions have spilled over to a UN nuclear meeting, with Kiev warning that a Russian military invasion could result in damage to its nuclear reactors and Moscow dismissing the scenario as "hysterics.", AP reports

A Ukrainian statement to the board of the International Atomic Energy Agency said: "aggression of regular military formations" could spread radiation contamination in Ukraine and neighboring countries.

Russia, in turn, said Ukrainian authorities have been seized by the "very depth of hysterics" and "are hallucinating about some kind of phantom danger."

19.08 The head of NATO says it is responding to Russia's military intervention in Ukraine by suspending most of the military alliance's meetings with Russia and reviewing all of its cooperation with Moscow, AP reports.

NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said that ambassadors for NATO's 28 member states decided after a meeting with their Russian counterpart to suspend plans for a joint mission as well as all civilian and military meetings.

Rasmussen said because of Russia's military action in Ukraine's Crimean peninsula "the entire range of NATO-Russia cooperation [is] under review."

18.54 The anchorwoman of Russia Today is standing by her criticism of Russia's military incursion in Ukraine, saying she would rather risk her job and "go down on the right side of history."

Abby Martin, a Washington-based newswoman for Russia Today, told The Associated Press today that the network has decided not to fire her for harshly condemning Moscow on the air for sending in troops to take control of much of Crimea, a peninsula in the Black Sea.

Pro-Russian demonstrators clash with participants of an anti-war rally as riot police try to separate them, in Donetsk. (Reuters)

Check out the video of Martin's criticism and out accompanying story by Josie Ensor here.

18.40 The Russian news agency Interfax today reported that Russia's Central banker has contradicted Putin over the extent to which the Russian market will be affected by Ukraine

The situation on developing markets has generally stabilized by today day following the outflow of capital that was linked to the curtailing quantitative easing programmes in developed countries but in Russia the situation was affected by the political factor, the head of Russian Central Bank, Elvira Nabiullina, thinks.

"As a whole, the situation there has become relative stable. In Russia there would have been, most likely, a similar situation but, unfortunately, the well-known political factor has interfered," Nabiullina said at a meeting of Russian President Vladimir Putin with members of the government on Wednesday.

According to Nabiullina, investors "have quite nervously reacted to the escalation of political tension in Ukraine".

She admitted, however, that the decisions taken by the Central Bank on Monday, in particular, to increase the cumulative intervention to move the borders of the currency corridor to 1.5bn dollars and to increasing the base rate to 7 per cent have made it possible to stabilize the situation.

On Tuesday, Putin blamed the current downturn on decisions taken by the Federal Reserve System in the US.

17.52 Hillary Clinton has reportedly compared Vladimir Putin's actions over Ukraine to those of Adolf Hitler in the 1930s. The former US secretary of state and Democratic frontrunner for the 2016 US presidential election was quoted as saying that Mr Putin is a man "who believes his mission is to restore Russian greatness".

"Now if this sounds familiar, it's what Hitler did back in the 30s," the Press Telegram quoted Clinton as telling attendees at a fundraiser for the Boys and Girls Clubs of Long Beach, California.

The ethnic Germans, the Germans by ancestry who were in places like Czechoslovakia and Romania and other places, Hitler kept saying they're not being treated right. 'I must go and protect my people,' and that's what's gotten everybody so nervous.

A woman wearing a Ukrainian flag stands at a memorial for people killed in clashes with the police at Kiev's Independence Square, Ukraine

17.31 The UN envoy has reportedly agreed to leave Crimea after being threatened by armed men and surrounded by a mob shouting "Russia! Russia!". ITV's James Mates tweets:

<noframe>Twitter: James Mates - Very unpleasant incident over. Robert Serry said v happy to leave <a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&q=%23crimea" target="_blank">#crimea</a> if it helped de escalate the situation.</noframe>

<noframe>Twitter: James Mates - Path of envoy's car blocked by protesters chanting Putin Putin. <a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&q=%23Crimea" target="_blank">#Crimea</a></noframe>

<noframe>Twitter: James Mates - Crowd chant Russia Russia as UN envoy leaves coffee shop and scrambles into waiting car<a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&q=%23Crimea" target="_blank">#Crimea</a></noframe>

17.25 A French-built helicopter carrier ship called the Vladivostok - bound for Russia - had its first sea trial today. Unfortunate timing.

16.59 ITV's James Mates tweets:

<noframe>Twitter: James Mates - UN special envoy Robert Serry's assistant says she saw at least one man with a gun among group who blocked his car. <a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&q=%23Ukraine" target="_blank">#Ukraine</a></noframe>

<noframe>Twitter: James Mates - He refused to go with men blocking car, got out and walked until he found coffee shop. He's asked ITV News team to stay with him. <a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&q=%23Ukraine" target="_blank">#Ukraine</a></noframe>

<noframe>Twitter: James Mates - UN special advisor Robert Serry had been visiting navy commander when his car was blocked. Stand off followed <a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&q=%23Ukraine" target="_blank">#Ukraine</a></noframe>

16.55 The UN has immediately denied the reports that the UN's special representative to Ukraine was seized. He was apparently threatened by gunmen.

16.47 BREAKING: Ukraine's foreign ministry has just confirmed UN's special representative to Ukraine has been seized by armed men in Crimea

An elderly pro-Russian activist cries as Urkainian riot police officers stand guard in front of the regional state administration building in the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk

16.14 Dozens have been injured in Donetsk as pro-Russians take back the local government HQ, AFP reports.

15.39 Pro-Russian protestors have retaken regional government buildings in Donetsk, hours after they were thrown out by police. The region is the home area of Yanukovych.

15.17 Our correspondent, Damien McElroy, has spoken to the doctor at the centre of the claims that snipers that shot people in Kiev were hired by Maidan leaders:

Olga Bogomolets said she had not told Mr Paet that policemen and protesters had been killed in the same manner.

"Myself I saw only protesters. I do not know the type of wounds suffered by military people," she told The Telegraph. "I have no access to those people."

But she said she had asked for a full forensic criminal investigation into the deaths that occurred in the Maidan. "No one who just sees the wounds when treating the victims can make a determination about the type of weapons. I hope international experts and Ukrainian investigators will make a determination of what type of weapons, who was involved in the killings and how it was done. I have no data to prove anything.

"I was a doctor helping to save people on the square. There were 15 people killed on the first day by snipers. They were shot directly to the heart, brain and arteries. There were more than 40 the next day, 12 of them died in my arms.

"Our nation has to ask the question who were the killers, who asked them to come to Ukraine. We need good answers on the basis of expertise."

Mr Paet's assertion that an opposition figure was behind the Maidan massacre was not one she could share.

"I think you can only say something like this on the basis of fact," she said. "Its not correct and its not good to do this. It should be based on fact."

She said the new government in Kiev had assured her a criminal investigation had begun but that she had not direct contact with it so far.

"They told me they have begun a criminal process and if they say that I believe them. The police have not given me any information on it."

A member of the Ukrainian Navy stands guard on top of the Ukrainian navy ship Ternopil in Sevastopol

15.07 Mr Kerry and Mr Lavrov have held direct talks on Ukraine in Paris on the sidelines of an international meeting on Lebanon, a diplomatic source said.

The pair held discussions along with their German and French counterparts over coffee after lunch at the French presidential palace, an AFP journalist witnessed.

14.27 Bruno Waterfield reports from Brussles on the OSCE mission:

Two British military advisers will be among 35 unarmed personnel sent to the Ukraine by the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

The mission is already on its way to Ukraine, at its request where it will “help to dispel concerns about unusual military activities”.

OSCE monitors are at the heart of Western diplomacy to contain Russia’s seizure of Crimea and to defuse a Ukraine crisis that has pushed the country to the brink of war.

Russia’s agreement to accept an OSCE monitoring mission in Ukraine will be a key condition for the EU and US if Moscow is to avoid sanctions at a Brussels summit tomorrow.

The OSCE has been discussing a monitoring mission to Ukraine, including Crimea, which would send in observers in much greater numbers, in hundreds rather than dozens.

According to Berlin, Vladimir Putin has accepted a suggestion by Angela Merkel to set up a “fact-finding mission” to Ukraine and a “contact group” under the auspices of the OSCE and the Council of Europe, Russia belongs to both organisations.

The OSCE monitoring mission could oversee and verify Russia’s withdrawal back to their bases in a way that is palatable for President Putin, providing the “de-escalation” and “exit ramp” that Western powers want for the Russians.

Russia’s acceptance of observers and the contact groups, alongside a promise to return to bases in Crimea, will be the pre-condition the EU needs at a summit tomorrow in order to avoid hitting Moscow with sanctions.

13.45 We cannot independently verify, but there are reports in Russia that the snipers who shot at protesters and police in Kiev were hired by Maidan leaders, according to a leaked phone conversation between the EU foreign affairs chief Catherine Ashton and Estonian foreign affairs minister. Russia Today, the Kremlin-funded news channel made the claim. Baroness Ashton had no comment when approached by Bruno Waterfield, our correspondent in Brussels.

“There is now stronger and stronger understanding that behind the snipers, it was not Yanukovich, but it was somebody from the new coalition,” Urmas Paet said during the conversation.

“I think we do want to investigate. I mean, I didn’t pick that up, that’s interesting. Gosh,” Baroness Ashton answered.

13.04 British and American military personnel will join the unarmed Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) mission to Ukraine, it has been announced. In a statement the OSCE said:

Eighteen OSCE participating States decided to send 35 unarmed military personnel to Ukraine in response to its request.

The matter was discussed at a joint meeting of the Permanent Council and the Forum for Security Co-operation (FSC) in Vienna on 4 March 2014.

The visit is taking place under Chapter III of the Vienna Document 2011, which allows for voluntary hosting of visits to dispel concerns about unusual military activities. Ukraine has requested all OSCE participating States to send military representatives from 5 to 12 March 2014, starting in Odessa. This is the first time this mechanism has been activated.

12.58 Damien McElroy reports from Donetsk:

Pavel Gubarev, the leader of a separatist movement in the eastern town of Donetsk, has vowed to retake the regional government headquarters despite a strong police cordon.

Supporters have gathered outside the building for a new assault due to start any minute.

12.42 Ukraine's new prime minister, in his first interview since taking office, has told The Associated Press that Crimea must remain part of Ukraine, but may be granted more local powers.

Arseney Yatsenyuk said that a special task force could be established "to consider what kind of additional autonomy the Crimean Republic could get".

12.35 German Chancellor Angela Merkel has called on Russia not to do anything to destabilise the situation in Ukraine. Her spokesman Steffen Seibert told a government news briefing:

Russia must desist from any taunting which could lead to a destabilisation of the situation.

As a result of Russia's actions, the situation in Crimea goes against international agreements that Russia has signed up to. It's a situation which is not acceptable.

12.30 William Hague has urged Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov to meet with his Ukrainian counterpart in Paris to kickstart negotiations aimed at peacefully resolving the crisis in the Crimea. The Foreign Secretary said:

The goal for today is to bring the Russians into a diplomatic process...at least a start of it.

A member of the Ukrainian Navy stands guard on top of the Ukrainian navy command ship Slavutych in Sevastopol

11.55 The Ukraine crisis has dominated newspaper editorials. The New York Times says that, although yesterday's conciliatory talk from Mr Putin has led to an easing of the tensions and a rebound of Russian financial markets, "leadership and credibility in a crisis mean reacting coolly and rationally, not rattling sabers, or rushing into economic warfare that allies may or may not support, or painting 'red lines' that the other side can cross with impunity":

Short of war, there is little the United States can do on its own to punish Russia. It is not among Russia’s major trading partners. Europe, which does far more business with Russia, has more leverage, but also a dependence on Russian gas, and, so far, European leaders have shown little enthusiasm for economic sanctions.

The measures that have been suggested — exclusion from the Group of 8, selective sanctions and travel bans — would not alone cause much pain. But the consequences of isolation take a toll over time.

A Telegraph editorial, meanwhile, writes that Mr Putin needs to be left in no doubt that his forays in Georgia in 2008 and now in Ukraine must not extend to former Soviet countries that are part of Nato:

Mr Putin needs to be left in no doubt that his revanchist forays in Georgia in 2008 and now in Ukraine must not extend to those former Soviet countries that are now part of Nato but which also have Russian-speaking populations, notably the Baltic states. Mr Kerry said America did not seek a confrontation with Russia, yet stood by Ukraine. The next few days will decide whether both of those outcomes are possible.

A Ukrainian warship passes through Bosporus strait, Turkey, heading towards Ukraine

11.50 Vladimir Putin has said that he did not want political tension to detract from economic cooperation with Russia's "traditional partners", signalling he hopes to avoid spillover from a bitter dispute with the West over Ukraine.

The Russian president told cabinet members:

We are seeing known political tension, it should not affect our current economic cooperation.

It's not necessary to add to the difficult situation, we need to cooperate with all our traditional partners - while providing for our own interests, of course.

It is not necessary to whip things up and place political considerations on top of issues of economic cooperation.

10.51 Here is the Russian flag being lowered - and the Ukrainian flag being hoisted in Donetsk:

10.41 Hopes are building that today could be significant in achieving a diplomatic breakthrough.

Ukraine's top security official has said he hoped the crisis in the Crimea region could soon be resolved through dialogue. Andriy Paruby, Secretary of Ukraine's Security and Defence Council, told reporters:

Last night there were already fewer emergency situations and fewer conflicts in Crimea. I hope that in the coming days a way will be found to solve everything through negotiations.

10.34 Fifteen member states of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) have agreed to send military observers to Ukraine - a diplomatic source told AFP:

Fifteen countries, including the United States and other countries in Europe and central Asia, will participate in this mission.

10.15 Mr Lavrov claimd Russia has no authority over the pro-Moscow forces operating in Ukraine. Asked whether he would negotiate the return of pro-Russian forces to their bases in the Crimea, Mr Lavrov told the news conference in Madrid: "If they are the self-defence forces created by the inhabitants of Crimea, we have no authority over them. They do not receive our orders."

10.03 Ukraine raised its flag over the government headquarters in the eastern city of Donetsk this morning, where a Russian flag had stood since Saturday, witnesses told Reuters.

Police said they were evacuating the building, which has been occupied since Monday by pro-Russian demonstrators. A police statement said the evacuation began after reports that the building was booby-trapped with bombs.

09.54 Russia will not allow bloodshed in Ukraine, Mr Lavrov says. At the same time as his press conference, Ukraine announces that a second missile base has been occupied by Russian forces.

Mr Lavrov said:

We will not allow bloodshed. We will not allow attempts against the lives and wellbeing of those who live in Ukraine and Russian citizens who live in Ukraine.

09.36 Sergei Lavrov - speaking in Madrid, says the West set a bad example by supporting Ukraine protesters.

Sergei Lavrov shakes hands with his Spanish counterpart Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo in Madrid

09.32 The Ukraine foreign minister is speaking in Paris at the start of a day of diplomacy between Russia, the US and Ukraine. Andriy Deshchytsya said:

We want to keep good dialogue, good relations with the Russian people. We want to settle this conflict peacefully. We don't want to fight with Russia.

09.30 London (GMT), 11.30 Kiev (EET), 13.30 Moscow (MSK), 01.30 Washington (PST) Good morning and welcome to our live coverage of the Ukraine crisis,

Ukraine crisis: March 4 as it happened

Ukraine crisis: March 3 as it happened