But there are thousands of other protesters who, like Mr. Chontorog, are late converts to militancy, who say they believe that the government has left them with no other choice by deploying so much lethal violence itself. On Thursday, a few antigovernment protesters could be seen carrying weapons. But with reports that the police have killed more than 70 demonstrators, most of the gunfire clearly came from the other side of the barricades. The interior minister reported that 29 police officers had been taken to the hospital and 67 had been captured by the protesters.

Video

Nonetheless, the murky nature of the opposition gathered in Independence Square, at least on its fringes, is causing problems for the United States and the European Union, which would prefer a neat apposition of peaceful, pro-democracy demonstrators versus the thuggish kleptocracy of President Viktor F. Yanukovych. But that line of thinking often blurs in the streets.

The ambiguity was captured on Thursday by a 25-year-old man wearing a mask who, after a victorious battle on Khreshchatyk Street in Kiev that morning, gave a blunt summary of his cause: “Nationalism is what I believe in,” said the man, who gave his name only as Nikolo. “The nation is my religion.”

Since the protests began in November, after Mr. Yanukovych spurned a trade and political deal with the European Union, Nikolo has traveled six times from his home in the western city of Lviv to hurl firebombs and rocks, and to prove a belligerent point that violence works.

“What have humanism and pacifism ever brought to any nation?” he asked, clutching a battered metal shield and a metal rod, his soot-blackened face covered by a brown balaclava. “Revolutions are violent.”

Young militants like Mr. Chontorog and Nikolo are by no means the only presence on the streets. More typical, perhaps, is the 33-year-old manager of an American telephone company here who on Thursday drove his blue family car to the barricades and casually unloaded shopping bags filled with empty glass bottles to help replenish the protest movement’s supply of firebombs.

“A week or even a few days ago, I would never have seen myself doing this,” said the well-dressed manager, who gave only his first name, Viktor, a supporter from the start of what began three months ago as a peaceful and often joyous revolt against Mr. Yanukovych. “Now, I am ready to bring not just bottles but also gasoline.”

Video

He added, in a commonly expressed sentiment: “Of course I don’t like violence. What is happening is very sad. But violence is just a response to violence on the other side.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But while the ranks of the protesters are diverse, the young men like Nikolo are the foot soldiers in a deepening civil conflict, the steel that refuses to bend under the pressure of thousands of riot police officers, volleys of live ammunition, snipers on rooftops and the looming threat of martial law.

They are heirs to a nationalist tradition that traces its roots to Stepan Bandera and the fanatical nationalists of western Ukraine who violently opposed their Polish and Soviet overlords in the 1930s, ‘40s and ‘50s before finally being subdued.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The sotni provide a quasi-military discipline to the opposition’s street muscle. The commanders of the hundreds meet with other leaders of bands of young men under the umbrella of the Maidan Self Defense organization, which is led by Andri Parubi, a member of the opposition party Fatherland, though his control over some of the right-wing street groups appears tenuous at times.

In addition to the hundreds, several other groups have fielded militarized bands of men. The Svoboda political party, the parliamentary wing of a broader western Ukrainian nationalist movement, has activists armed with clubs, chains and other bludgeons.

Svoboda has at times clashed with another nationalist organization of mounting influence in the street politics called Right Sector, a coalition of a half-dozen hard-line nationalist groups that were once on the fringe, such as Patriots of Ukraine, Trident and White Hammer. The two organizations have also cooperated in occupying buildings and manning barricades.