The climate of anti-Semitism can be found elsewhere, too. Jewish cemeteries and synagogues have been vandalized. Nadia Savchenko, a member of Parliament who became a national hero when she was a pilot captured by Russia, recently appeared on television and delivered an anti-Semitic screed. “I have nothing against Jews,” she said. “I do not like ‘kikes.’ ” She added: “Jews possess 80 percent of the power when they only account for 2 percent of the population.”

During my more than 20 years as a Ukrainian Jewish activist, I have proudly witnessed our Jewish community revive itself after 70 years of Soviet persecution. Even though many Jews have emigrated to Israel and the West, we remain a vibrant community of approximately 300,000. We love and support our country, and many Jews participated in the Euromaidan revolution.

The majority of Ukrainian Jews share the desire to build a modern, democratic state, free from the endemic corruption we have lived with for the past 25 years. We support Ukraine’s choice to integrate with the West — which is why the Kremlin’s attempt to turn Ukraine’s Jews against Kiev during Moscow’s takeover of Crimea failed — and we have no more desire to live under Russian domination than other citizens.

Ukrainian Jews are not the only ones concerned about this anti-Semitism. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C., the Simon Wiesenthal Center and 70 leading scholars have condemned the 2015 memory law.

In his speech during commemorations last year at Babi Yar, President Reuven Rivlin of Israel told the Ukrainian Parliament that “many collaborators to the crimes were Ukrainians. And among them, the fighters of the O.U.N. — who mocked the Jews, killed them and in many cases handed them over to the Germans — particularly distinguished themselves.” Poland, too, has been rankled by the glorification of the O.U.N. In February, the leader of Poland’s ruling party reportedly told President Poroshenko that Ukraine “won’t make it to Europe with Bandera.”

Sadly, the movement to rehabilitate the O.U.N. continues. This raises the concern that some Ukrainian politicians may be willing to sacrifice our country’s relations with the United States, Poland and Israel — not to mention the safety of Jewish citizens here — in exchange for “peaceful coexistence” with the far right.

Over the past three years, the United States and Europe have provided Ukraine invaluable support in its quest for independence. Part of that support was intended to help ensure that Kiev does not stray from the goal of becoming a Western nation. For example, newspapers, including this one, and politicians, like former Vice President Joe Biden, have not been shy about condemning corruption. Western leaders’ must also stress that the glorification of organizations like O.U.N.-U.P.A. remains incompatible with Western values. We need the United States and the world’s help — for the memory of the slaughtered Jews and for Ukraine’s future.