The most dramatic expressions of the new pro-Russia fervor have taken place here, the former political base of Viktor F. Yanukovych, the country’s deposed president, and in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second most populous city, just 20 miles from the Russian border.

When a crowd of thousands of pro-Russia demonstrators in Kharkiv stormed an administration building occupied by pro-Kiev demonstrators on Saturday in a melee that left two dead and 100 hospitalized, a 25-year-old Muscovite, who was staying in a hotel just off the square, scaled the building, lowered the Ukrainian flag and hoisted the Russian banner in its place.

“I am proud that I was able to take part in defeating the fighters who came to ‘protest peacefully’ with knives in Kharkiv and raise the Russian tricolor on the building of the liberated administration,” wrote Mikhail Chuprikov, who hotel employees confirmed checked in under a Russian passport, in a blog post under a pseudonym.

The protests have served as grist for Russian state television networks, which hailed the footage of the Russian flag being raised across Ukraine as evidence of a rejection of the new government in Kiev by ethnic Russians. Russia’s permanent mission to NATO posted on Twitter a map of Ukraine with superimposed images of Russian flags in 11 Ukrainian cities where the protests took place on Saturday, including the Black Sea port of Odessa, as well as Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkiv and Donetsk.

BELARUS 100 Miles RUSSIA POLAND Kiev Lviv Dnieper River Kharkiv UKRAINE DONBASS COAL REGION Donetsk Dnipropetrovsk Don River MOLDOVA Rostov-on-Don Odessa ROMANIA Sea of Azov CRIMEA Simferopol Sevastopol Danube River Black Sea BULGARIA

Russia’s Foreign Ministry has condemned Kiev for allowing what it called armed bandits to raise havoc in the country’s east, citing the shooting of a Russian tourist and an unconfirmed nighttime assault on a police station in Crimea, which security personnel defending the station denied happened.

Amid the rumors and rising anxiety, self-declared municipal self-defense groups have emerged, saying they are ready to fight the spread of fascism — Mr. Putin’s description of the new leadership and its supporters — from the country’s west with Russia’s help.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Monday’s seizure of the government building here was led by Pavel Gubarev, the founder of the People’s Militia of Donbass, the coal-mining region where Donetsk is. In a speech from the dais of the captured chamber, he rejected Kiev’s authority and called on Mr. Putin to bring troops to the city.

The sudden uprisings have shocked many in the region, where there was strong sentiment against the pro-West demonstrators in Kiev, but few calls to draw closer to Russia until very recently.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“I am sure that they are paid,” said Valentina Azarova, 55, a former seamstress, pointing at a dozen young men spitting sunflower seed shells in a pro-Russia protest camp in central Kharkiv on Sunday.

“I am Russian, and I am embarrassed for my country,” she said, discussing the possibility that Russian troops could come to the city. “Russia is here just as much as Russia is in the Crimea.”

In Donetsk, the movement for greater ties with Moscow seems to have gained a foothold. The City Council on Saturday called for a referendum on greater autonomy for the region, which the Ukrainian government has called illegal. At the government building, Roman Romanov, the head of the police for the Donetsk region, told protesters that he “obeys the people,” but urged restraint from them, saying the “police are here to help you.”

Video

Mr. Gubarev, the militia leader, has demanded that he be made the head of Donetsk’s regional government. When his supporters took the legislative building, he collected identification cards to identify members barricaded on the upper floors of the building in case they tried to leave.

Many of the legislators had scratched their faces off the cards with pens in an apparent attempt to avoid identification.

Pro-Russia protesters caught one man who dashed out of the building before it was seized, beat him on a busy downtown street and covered his face with a green liquid.

In general, however, protest leaders tried to prevent outright violence.

At 4:45 p.m., protesters agreed to allow legislative employees to leave the building. One member of the legislature who asked not to be named called the situation “a black hole.”

“This is the hand of Russia,” he said.

On the streets, protesters chased those leaving the building in suits and demanded to see their passports to determine whether they were elected officials. They pushed the legislators back into the building, chanting, “Work!”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Don’t hit anyone, and don’t break anything,” called out a buzz-cut protest organizer who gave his name as Viktor, who said he was a supporter of Mr. Gubarev. “If there is violence, it will make problems for Putin.”