Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

British builder Brendan Vaughan has been named as one of seven hostages murdered by terrorists who wrongly believed they were being hunted down by special forces.

Mr Vaughan was killed along with six other foreign nationals after being snatched three weeks ago. Foreign Secretary William Hague described the atrocity as an “act of cold-blooded murder”.

Al-Qaeda-linked group Ansaru said it had executed the workers seized in the northern state of Bauchi because of attempts by Nigerian and British forces to free them.

The Islamist extremists claimed they acted after British planes had been spotted at a Nigerian airport, suggesting a rescue operation was under way.

A statement released by the group provided internet links to two local media websites containing reports that five “jet bombers” and soldiers had been spotted at Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport in Abuja.

The articles said the planes were marked “Royal Army” and may have been preparing to launch a rescue mission for the hostages.

But the Ministry of Defence said its planes were at the airport to support the French-led operation in Mali and categorically denied they were involved in any rescue mission.

The Ansaru terrorists published grainy photos, purporting to show the bodies of a Briton, an Italian, a Greek and four Lebanese snatched from Lebanese firm Setraco. An armed militant stood in front of them.

William Hague said: “It is with deep sadness that I must confirm that a British construction worker, held hostage in Nigeria since 16 February, is likely to have been killed at the hands of his captors, along with six other foreign nationals who we believe were also tragically murdered.

“This was an act of cold-blooded murder, which I condemn in the strongest terms.

“My thoughts are with his family, and the families of the other hostages, who will be devastated by this tragic loss.

“I offer them our deep condolences at this terrible time. Responsibility for this tragic outcome rests squarely with the terrorists.”

He added that Britain is determined to work with the Nigerian Government to find the terrorists and hold them to account.

Islamist groups operate throughout Northern Nigeria where the men were snatched at a Setraco camp at Jama’are, 125 miles north of Bauchi.

The gunmen had first attacked a local prison and burned police trucks before blowing up a fence at the construction company’s compound, killing a guard.

They appeared to be organised and knew who they wanted, leaving Nigerian household staff unharmed.

The hostage-taking in the remote town saw the largest number of foreigners seized in the mostly Muslim north since Islamist insurgency intensified two years ago. Ansaru was suspected of killing British hostage Chris McManus and an Italian a year ago.