At least 800 members of the Boko Haram terror group have reportedly surrendered to the Nigerian military in the last three weeks.

Boko Haram, whose name means "Western education is forbidden", previously pledged allegiance to Isis. Since 2009, the insurgency has killed around 20,000 people and made 2.5 million homeless.

They were also responsible for abducting around 270 schoolgirls from a school in Chibok in April 2014.

According to a report from the Institute for Economics and Peace released towards the end of last year, Boko Haram overtook Isis in 2014 to become the deadliest terror group in the world.

The rise of Boko Haram







19 show all The rise of Boko Haram



































1/19 Boko Haram The leader of the Islamist extremist group Boko Haram Abubakar Shekau delivers a message. Boko Haram has claimed responsibility for the mass killings in the north-east Nigerian town of Baga in a video where he warned the massacre “was just the tip of the iceberg”. As many as 2,000 civilians were killed and 3,700 homes and business were destroyed in the 3 January 2015 attack on the town near Nigeria's border with Cameroon AFP

2/19 Boko Haram People displaced as a result of Boko Haram attacks in the northeast region of Nigeria, are seen near their tents at a faith-based camp for internally displaced people (IDP) in Yola, Adamawa State. Boko Haram says it is building an Islamic state that will revive the glory days of northern Nigeria's medieval Muslim empires, but for those in its territory life is a litany of killings, kidnappings, hunger and economic collapse

3/19 Boko Haram Nitsch Eberhard Robert, a German citizen abducted and held hostage by suspected Boko Haram militants, is seen as he arrives at the Yaounde Nsimalen International airport after his release in Yaounde, Cameroon on 21 January 2015

4/19 Boko Haram Officials of the Nigerian National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) visit victims of a bomb blast in Gombe at the Specialist Hospital in Gombe. According to local reports at least six people were killed and 11 wounded after a bomb blast in a marketplace in Nigeria's northeastern state of Gombe on 16 January 2015. Islamist militant group Boko Haram has been blamed for a string of recent attacks in the North East of Nigeria

5/19 Boko Haram People gather at the site of a bomb explosion in a area know to be targeted by the militant group Boko Haram in Kano on 28 November 2014

6/19 Boko Haram People gather to look at a burnt vehicle following a bomb explosion that rocked the busiest roundabout near the crowded Market in Maiduguri, Borno State on 1 July 2014. A truck exploded in a huge fireball killing at least 15 people in the northeast Nigerian city of Maiduguri, the city repeatedly hit by Boko Haram Islamists

7/19 Boko Haram President Goodluck Jonathan visits Nigerian Army soldiers fighting Boko Haram Getty Images

8/19 Boko Haram Displaced people from Baga listen to Goodluck Jonathan after the Boko Haram killings AFP/Getty

9/19 Boko Haram Nigeria's President Goodluck Jonathan speaking to troops during a visit to Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State; most of the region has been overrun by Boko Haram AFP/Getty

10/19 Boko Haram Members of the Nigerian military patrolling in Maiduguri, North East Nigeria, close to the scene of attacks by Boko Haram EPA

11/19 Boko Haram Boko Haram’s leader, Abubakar Shekau, appears in a video in which he warns Cameroon it faces the same fate as Nigeria AFP

12/19 Boko Haram South Africans protest in solidarity against the abduction of hundreds of schoolgirls in Nigeria by the Muslim extremist group Boko Haram and what protesters said was the failure of the Nigerian government and international community to rescue them, during a march to the Nigerian Consulate in Johannesburg

13/19 Boko Haram Boko Haram militants have seized the town in north-eastern Nigeria that nearly 300 schoolgirls were kidnapped from in April 2014 AFP

14/19 Boko Haram A soldier stands guard in front of burnt buses after an attack in Abuja. Twin blasts at a bus station packed with morning commuters on the outskirts of Nigeria's capital killed dozens of people, in what appeared to be the latest attack by Boko Haram Islamists, April 2014

15/19 Boko Haram The aftermath of the attack, when Boko Haram fighters in trucks painted in military colours killed 51 people in Konduga in February 2014 AFP/Getty Images

16/19 Boko Haram The leader of Boko Haram, Abubakar Shekau (with papers) in a video grab taken in July 2014 AFP/Getty

17/19 Boko Haram Ruins of burnt out houses in the north-eastern settlement of Baga, pictured after Boko Haram attacks in 2013 AP

18/19 Boko Haram A Boko Haram attack in Nigeria, 2013 AFP/Getty Images

19/19 Boko Haram Abubakar Shekau, Boko Haram’s leader AP

Brigadier General Rabe Abubakar, acting director of defence information, told local newspaper The Punch "about 800 of the Boko Haram members have surrendered to the military".

The statement came a day after the Defence Headquarters announced the establishment of a rehabilitation camp for former Boko Haram militants.

The army did not give details of how the camp was run, but said insurgents would undergo vocational training and eventually be reintegrated into society.

Nigeria steps up fight against Boko Haram

Last week, the Nigerian Army said it had rescued over 11,000 captives of Boko Haram in the last month.

Although joint operations between Nigeria and neighbouring countries succeeded in driving the militant Islamists from many of its strongholds last year, the terror group has recently stepped up cross-border attacks and suicide bombings.

It has become known for its use of female suicide bombers. In February, a teenage girl ripped off her suicide vest and fled from her handlers after being sent to blow up the Dikwa refugee camp in northeastern Nigeria.

Her two companions went through with the attack and killed at least 58 people.