As of Thursday, the girl’s precise motives were unclear.

Many experts on Boko Haram say the women and girls who are deployed have been brainwashed or are simply unaware that the devices they are carrying can kill them.

Video

Leila Zerrougui, the United Nations special representative on children and armed conflict, said in early 2015 that the Nigerian authorities at the time had told her that explosives worn by bombers were often remotely detonated. In an interview on Thursday, she said that no longer appeared to be the case. Even so, she cautioned that little was known about their motivations, and to what extent the girls had been coerced to blow themselves up.

Others say at least some of the women and girls, forcibly married to Boko Haram members, support the group’s cause of insurgency against secularism and for the creation of a strict Islamic state.

Female bombers have proved particularly lethal largely because they can move about without arousing suspicion. Their religious gowns double as hiding places for explosives.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The camp at Dikwa is currently sheltering about 52,000 people, most of whom are women and girls. Food is sparse there, and sanitation issues are growing.

Government officials have been returning camp residents to their homes as a stepped-up military push has rooted Boko Haram members from many villages that had been their strongholds.

A senior American military official said the Nigerian military was not pushing aggressively enough in the northern state of Borno, where Boko Haram originated, despite an intensified campaign by President Muhammadu Buhari. The group is hunkered down in the Sambisa Forest and doing mostly what it pleases there, including carrying out cross-border attacks where women have also been deployed as bombers.

In northern Nigeria, local government officials said as many as 1,000 women and girls were recently rescued from the village of Boboshe and taken to the Dikwa camp. They told officials they had been used as sex slaves.

In the past, women rescued from Boko Haram have said they were raped repeatedly, with some reporting that they thought they were being impregnated to create a new generation of Boko Haram fighters.