Suspected Boko Haram militants have begun an assault on Nigeria’s north-eastern city of Maiduguri, according to military, government and local sources.

At about 9am (0800 GMT) on Sunday, a Reuters witness said shelling could be heard and that military helicopters were circling the city. All roads have been closed, a security source said, and commercial activity has been shut down.

The city is the capital of Borno state and would be a major prize for the insurgents who are trying to carve out an Islamic state.

The militants began the attack at the edge of the city in the Njimtilo area shortly after midnight on Saturday.

“We are all just staying in our houses,” said Umar Mohammed, a resident living near the main military barracks. He said attacks were taking place on four sides, including the main road leading to the city. “At 5am we heard a bomb blast and that was when the shooting started. Since then, the streets have been totally empty,” he said.

A security source told the Guardian that on Saturday four teenagers had turned themselves over to civilian vigilantes who work alongside the military.

“The boys said they had been sent to plant bombs. There were 10 of them but these four escaped because they were tired of living in the bush [where Boko Haram runs its camps],” the official added.

Sporadic fighting has flared around Maiduguri in recent days, with at least 15 killed in attacks in nearby Kambari on Saturday.

Fighter jets were also seen leaving from Yola, the capital of neighbouring Adamawa state, 250 miles (400km) south of Maiduguri.

Boko Haram has waged a five-year insurgency in the north-east of Africa’s biggest economy. The militants control vast swaths of Borno state and some areas of neighbouring Adamawa and Yobe states. They recently took control of the town and army base at Baga by Lake Chad.

The Nigerian army’s inability to squash the group has become a major headache for the president, Goodluck Jonathan, who is seeking re-election in February. Jonathan visited the state capital on Saturday as part of his campaign and opposition candidate Muhammadu Buhari was due to arrive on Monday.

The insurgents last attempted to take Maiduguri in December 2013 and attacked a nearby army and air force base.

Resident Rachel Adamu, who lives near Njimtilo, said: “Please pray for us, we are in danger, under serious attack now.”