Over 1,059 persons killed in 75 major attacks by Boko Haram since Buhari’s inauguration

By Methuselah Brozz

Posted: 2015/08/22 13:04 pm WAT | In: SECURITY |





The Executive Director, Stefanos Foundation, Mr. Mark Lipdo, has said no fewer than 1,059 persons were killed in 75 major attacks in northern Nigeria since the inception of President Muhammadu Buhari’s administration.

Stefanos Foundation, a non governmental organisation, has been attending to the welfare of Internally Displaced Persons from the various attacks in their camps in Bukuru area of Jos South, Plateau State.

Lipdo said the highest number of attacks, 34, occurred in Borno State, where 551 people were killed.

In a statement in Jos on Thursday, which was made available to our correspondent, Lipdo said all the attacks occurred between May 29 and August 12, especially under the watch of the recently sacked service chiefs.

According to him, Plateau State ranked second with 19 attacks and 112 people killed while Yobe occupied the third spot with eight attacks and 86 people killed.

Adamawa, Bauchi, Benue, Gombe, Kano, Nasarawa and Taraba states placed fourth with two attacks each and a total of 254 people killed.

Though two attacks took place in Gombe, the statement said it had the highest casualty figure of 99.

Though the Plateau State Government had on August, 13 declared a dusk-to-dawn curfew in Riyom and Barkin Ladi Local Government Areas following a resurgence of violence the councils, the attacks have continued unabated.

President of Berom Youth Movement, Mr. Choji Chuwang, told our correspondent on the telephone on Thursday that the day the curfew was announced, armed men invaded a house in Barkin Ladi and demanded money.

He added that when the owner could not give them any money, the attackers inflicted machete cuts on him.

Chuwang alleged that a neighbour, who heard the victim’s cries, tried to come to his rescue, but was shot at close range and killed on the spot.

He explained that on Wednesday, two people were shot dead; one on his way to his farm at Rakung and the other, a local miner, who killed at his mining site in Gana Ropp areas in Barkin Ladi.

source: Punch