Leaders pay tribute to Mandela

World leaders yesterday joined South Africa to mourn the death of former President Nelson Mandela, who passed on Thursday.



Mandela, who was jailed for 27 years and rose to become the president and a symbol of equity and justice from whom world leaders drew strength and lessons, left behind more than just a legacy; he left inspiration.



He was aged 95.



“There is no doubting Mandela’s virtues as a moral exemplar and inspirational figure. There is no modern leader who has done more to deserve the waves of praise and mourning that his passing has unleashed,” President Paul Kagame wrote in a tribute.



Kenya President Uhuru Kenyatta praised Mandela’s principles and dreams to have an inclusive society.



“He believed in the noble principles of equity, justice, cohesiveness and inclusiveness in governance. He had faith and confidence in the ability of his people to realise the dream of a free, united and prosperous South Africa,” Kenyatta said.



Ghana’s John Dramani Mahama hailed Mandela as “a man of peace and tolerance” and “the man who sowed unifying peace in South Africa.



“Mandela was an icon, not only of hope, but also of the possibility for healing,” he said in a statement. “His utilisation of peace as a vehicle of liberation showed Africa that if we were to move beyond the divisiveness caused by colonisation, and the pain of our self-inflicted wounds, compassion and forgiveness must play a role in governance.”



National mourning



Nigeria’s Goodluck Jonathan said: “Mandela will always be remembered and honoured by all mankind as one of its greatest liberators, a wise, courageous and compassionate leader, and an icon of true democracy. Mandela’s death will create a huge vacuum that will be difficult to fill in our continent.”



Jonathan also declared three days of national mourning for Mandela.



Senegal’s Macky Sall said: “We have lost a giant, one of the greatest figures in contemporary Africa. No man of our time has given so much for the cause of his people, for Africa, and for the good of mankind. Mandela taught us courage, strength, forgiveness.”



Ugandan Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi joined the world in paying tribute to Mandela.



“Madiba was one of the greatest leaders in the world. He changed the world. I sympathise to the family and to the world for this loss,” Mbabazi said.



The African Union mourned the passing of the liberation leader, by ordering its flags to fly at half-mast and praised a “pan-African icon.”



“Mandela has fought a good fight, and bowed out with great reverence,” said Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, the chair of the African Union Commission.



“His passing on is a great loss to his family, to our continent and indeed to humanity itself. Madiba symbolises the spirit of pan-Africanism and solidarity in the struggles of humanity against apartheid, oppression and colonialism and for self-determination, peace and reconciliation.”



South African Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a close friend to the former Number 46664 Robben Island inmate, remembered him as one who inspired the nation into reconciliation.



“God was so good to us in South Africa by giving us Nelson Mandela to be our president at a crucial moment in our history. He inspired us to walk the path of forgiveness and reconciliation and so South Africa did not go up in flames.”



Former South African President F.W. DeKlerk, who shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Mandela and confessed to “often having a stormy relationship” with Mandela, praised his tenacity.



“It was an honour to work with Mandela in bringing democracy to South Africa. I believe that his example will live on and that it will continue to inspire all South Africans to achieve his vision of non-racialism, justice, human dignity, and equality for all,” he said.



It was de Klerk, who, after Mandela’s release from prison, called time on the white minority rule and served in a government of unity under Mandela.



Former UN chief Koffi Anan said: “The world has lost a visionary leader, a courageous voice for justice, and a clear moral compass. Mandela stands as a dear friend to us all by showing us that the path to freedom and human dignity lies in love, wisdom and compassion for one another.”



UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon described Mandela as “a giant for justice.”



“Africa has suffered from colonial rule and abuse of human rights and human dignity and it’s only because of such a great man like Mandela that it is possible for people to live with dignity. He touched our lives in deeply personal ways,” Ban said.



Chinese President Xi Jinping praised Mandela’s “historic contribution” to South Africa and the world.



Japanese premier Shinzo Abe said: “He fought for the abolition of apartheid with a strong will. On nation building, he made a major achievement with focus on the reconciliation of the people. He was a great leader.”

Contact email: editorial[at]newtimes.co.rw