ATLANTA, Friday, December 6, 2013 - Just like we vividly remember the day Mandela walked out of Jail, Many of us will remember where and what we were doing when we heard about the death of world beloved Madiba. I happen to be at a sprint store when I received a text from Jennifer Fierberg an Africa Global village reporter. She was alerting me to the fact that she had already posted the death of Madiba on AGV.

Word of Nelson Mandela's death spread quickly across Malawi, Africa and the world bringing with it a mix of reverence and grief for a man who was born in South Africa but in the end belonged to the world.

Joyce Banda

President Dr. Joyce Banda described the passing on of former South African President Nelson Mandela as loss to South Africa and the whole world. In an interview with BBC Radio Friday morning, President Banda said she was personally grieved with Mandela’s death.

“We are all shattered and shocked. My regret at the passing on of one of Africa’s greatest sons who fought against all forms of oppression is so profound,” said President Banda.

President Banda said all Africans have drawn inspiration from Mandela. Said Banda: “We have all drawn inspiration from ‘Madiba’. We have learnt that with courage and determination we can overcome all evil.”

She said she had grown up hearing about Mandela and had always wanted to meet the great man, a thing she achieved recently through his wife, Grace Machel.

Barack Obama

President Barack Obama ordered American flags to be lowered immediately to half-staff until Monday in tribute to Mandela, a rare honor for a foreign leader.

Memorials to the former South African president popped up from Los Angeles to Chicago, where flowers and candles were laid in front of murals bearing his likeness. In Washington, people gathered in front of the South Africa's embassy.

Bishop Tutu:

Fellow Nobel Peace prize winner Archbishop Desmond Tutu led South African tributes to Nelson Mandela, who died at his Johannesburg home late yesterday.

“He transcended race and class in his personal actions, through his warmth and through his willingness to listen and to empathize with others,” Tutu said in an e-mailed statement today. “And he restored others’ faith in Africa and Africans.”

Muhammad Ali

"What I will remember most about Mr. Mandela is that he was a man whose heart, soul and spirit could not be contained or restrained by racial and economic injustices, metal bars or the burden of hate and revenge," Ali said in his statement released by the Ali Center. "He taught us forgiveness on a grand scale."

"He inspired others to reach for what appeared to be impossible and moved them to break through the barriers that held them hostage mentally, physically, socially and economically," Ali said. "He made us realize, we are our brother's keeper and that our brothers come in all colors."

Among the exhibits at the Ali Center is a photo of Ali and Mandela, their hands clenched into fists as if they're boxing.



