Prominent Australians reflect on Nelson Mandela in this exclusive tribute from his foundation Afrika Tikkun https://www.globaldevelopment.org.au/honourmandela.htm

PRIME Minister Tony Abbott has added his voice to a tsunami of tributes to Nelson Mandela shortly after the news of his passing.

Mr Abbott said while he had never met Mr Mandela, he thought he was an extraordinary man.

"Nelson Mandela was one of the great figures of Africa … and arguably one of the great figures of the century," Mr Abbott told 3AW's Neil Mitchell.

"A truly great man.

"While I never met him I did read that book 'a long walk to freedom' and the impression I got of Nelson Mandela is that he was someone who suffered but was not bitter but enabled by that suffering."

In a later statement Mr Abbott said Mr Mandela would be remembered not just as a political leader but a "moral leader".

REMEMBER: Seven ways Mandela changed us all

BREAKING NEWS: Nelson Mandela dies

GALLERY: The life and times of Nelson Mandela

OBITUARY: Mandela's extraordinary life

"Death is something inevitable.When a man has done what he considers to be his duty to his people&his country,he can rest in peace" #Madiba — NelsonMandela (@NelsonMandela) December 5, 2013

"He spent much of his life standing against the injustice of apartheid. When that fight was won, he inspired us again by his capacity to forgive and reconcile his country," the Prime Minister said.

"While the world may never see another Nelson Mandela, he has inspired countless men and women throughout the world to live more courageous and honest lives.

"On behalf of the Australian government and the Australian community, I extend my condolences to Mr Mandela's family and to the people of South Africa."

Bill Shorten

Opposition Leader Bill Shorten described Mr Mandela as unarguably one of the greatest global figures of our time.

``Today we have lost a light of our world,'' he said in a joint statement with opposition foreign affairs spokeswoman Tanya Plibersek.

.@AustralianLabor pays tribute to Nelson Mandela - unarguably one of the greatest global figures of our time #Madiba pic.twitter.com/kclmHzOnkF — Bill Shorten (@billshortenmp) December 5, 2013

In fractious and troubled times, Mr Mandela led his nation out of the dark age of apartheid - not with a violent struggle, but with peace, compassion and a force of moral leadership.

``He achieved perhaps more than any other leader in his pursuit of peace, acceptance and justice.''

Julia Gillard

Former prime minister Julia Gillard also posted about her sadness over Mr Mandela's passing on Twitter.

"The world has lost a great man," she said.

"As we grieve for Nelson Mandela we should also celebrate his tremendous victory over prejudice and hate. JG."

The world has lost a great man. As we grieve for Nelson Mandela we should also celebrate his tremendous victory over prejudice and hate. JG — Julia Gillard (@JuliaGillard) December 5, 2013

John Howard

Former prime minister John Howard said Mr Mandela was one of the world's greatest figures.

The former Prime Minister said that the South African leader "reminded us that, whatever the odds, persistence and endurance ultimately can win through".

"His capacity to forgive those who had imprisoned him for so long was, arguably the most important quality of his leadership of South Africa. It displayed a remarkable generosity of spirit," Mr Howard said in a statement.

"Nelson Mandela's warm personality endeared him not only to his own people, but to millions around the world.

"He set a great example to the people of South Africa, who can best honour his legacy by working to ensure that the new South Africa he strove so hard to create is preserved and strengthened."

Mr Howard met Mr Mandela in 2000 when the political leader was visiting Australia.

A light just went out across the world with the passing of Nelson Mandela. — Kevin Rudd (@MrKRudd) December 5, 2013

Kevin Rudd

Former PM Kevin Rudd also added to the tributes.

"A light just went out across the world with the passing of Nelson Mandela," Mr Rudd told News Corp Australia.

"In a word, the transformational power of forgiveness and reconciliation. Man of the century: Nelson Mandela."

In a word, the transformational power of forgiveness and reconciliation. Man of the century: Nelson Mandela. KRudd — Kevin Rudd (@MrKRudd) December 5, 2013

Malcolm Fraser

Former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser says there will be an overwhelming sadness in South Africa as its people realise they are finally without Nelson Mandela.

The former South African president and freedom fighter was a pragmatist whose sense of justice, determination and pragmatism healed a country torn apart by apartheid.

``If there was ever going to be some sense of unity in South Africa, there had to be a sense of forgiveness, there could certainly be no sense of vengeance,'' Mr Fraser told the ABC.

``There will be sadness throughout South Africa, the recognition that they are finally without Mandela.

``I believe they will fight for his ideals even more strongly than in the past.''

Recalling his first meeting with Mr Mandela in 1986, Mr Fraser said his first question was about cricket.

``His first remark to me was, after hello, was ... Mr Fraser is Donald Bradman still alive?

Mr Fraser later brought him a bat signed by The Don ``in recognition of a great unfinished innings.''

Paul Keating

Former prime minister Paul Keating said Mandela was a ``font of kindness'' in a harsh and racially divided country.

``He brought unity and peace to South Africa through his own goodness. And became a beacon not only to Southern Africa but to the whole world,'' he said in a statement.

Bob Hawke

Another former prime minister Bob Hawke said Mr Mandela truly embodied the ideal of the brotherhood of man.

``His courage and character has been an inspiration to many, both within and beyond South Africa,'' he said in a statement.

Mr Hawke attended Mr Mandela's inauguration in 1994.

``He devoted himself to healing a nation that had suffered from centuries of racial discrimination and oppression,'' Mr Hawke said.

``His long campaign and self-sacrifice for political freedom for his people in South Africa was unparalleled in the 20th century.''

Governor-General Quentin Bryce

Governor-General Quentin Bryce said Mr Mandela's death brought "great sadness to the world".

"No person in our lifetime has been more admired and respected," a statement from Ms Bryce read.

"He inspired us all by his leadership and enduring commitment to the recognition of the worth of every human being. The freedom and reconciliation that followed years of injustice and struggle will continue to capture the imagination of people everywhere."

Ms Bryce remembered the "twinkling sense of humour" on the face of Mr Mandela during the last time they met.

"I remember well my last meeting with Mr Mandela, as Governor-General, in Johannesburg in March 2009. His wisdom and dignity shone through, as always. So too, the twinkling sense of humour etched on his face," she said."

"Our thoughts and prayers are with Mr Mandela's family and the people of South Africa at this time of sorrow and mourning."

Greens Senators

Greens Senators Christine Milne and Sarah Hanson-Young remembered the former South African President.

"Vale Nelson Mandela. He was one of the most inspiring, courageous and humble leaders of the 20th Century," Senator Milne said on Twitter.

Senator Hanson-Young posted: "The world is indebted to Nelson Mandela's leadership and vision for freedom, equality and humanity. An incredible gift to share with so many".

In a later statement Greens Leader Christine Milne expressed sadness at Mr Mandela's death.

"As a global symbol for peace, for freedom and for the struggle for liberation from suppression and violence, Nelson Mandela will live forever in the hearts and minds of Australians, just as he will for people across the globe," she said.

"Education is the most powerful weapon you can choose to change the world." #Mandela — Christine Milne (@senatormilne) December 5, 2013

"The world will be united in mourning for Nelson Mandela and in celebration of this great life. I express my own personal gratitude for Mr Mandela's personal sacrifices and gifts to humankind."

Senator Milne said she had been in attendance when Mr Mandela gave an address to the World Parks Congress in 2004.

"I was humbled to be in the presence of one of the greatest and wisest leaders of the century."

"On behalf of the Australian Greens I send best wishes and thoughts for Mr Mandela's family, the people of South Africa, and to all those who will mourn this great loss to humanity."

Gareth Evans

Former foreign minister Gareth Evans said Mr Mandela was the ``simply the most impressive, decent human being'' he had ever met or was ever likely to meet.

``He was an absolutely inspirational figure,'' he told ABC radio in Canberra.

The then Foreign Minister was one of the first international officials to greet Mandela in Lusaka days after his release from prison in 1990.

Evans later described as ``pure joy'' his sitting across a table from a man who'd long been a personal hero.

``Madiba is simply the most impressive and humanly decent statesman I have ever met,'' he said.

Without Mr Mandela's ``towering political and moral'' leadership, the transition in South Africa would have been ``long and ugly and bloody beyond measure''.

Rob Mitchell, MP

Labor MP Rob Mitchell took to twitter to post about Mr Mandela's death.

"Extremely sad day that the man who single-handedly reshaped the view of the world has left us. Nelson Mandella (sic) was an inspiration to everyone," he said.

Extremely sad day that the man who singlehandedly reshaped the view of the world has left us. Nelson Mandella was an inspiration to everyone — Rob Mitchell (@RobMitchellMP) December 5, 2013

Cardinal George Pell

Cardinal George Pell told News Corp Australia of his sadness at Mr Mandela's passing.

"We should thank God for him," Cardinal Pell, who is in Rome at the moment, said in a statement.

"Without any doubt Nelson Mandela was one of the greatest men of the twentieth century, not simply because he led his people to freedom after decades of servitude under the 'apartheid' regime but because the victory was peaceful and because he forgave those who had imprisoned him for 27 years.

"He will be greatly missed. May he now rest in peace."

Jason Clare, MP

Labor MP Jason Clare posted his condolences on Twitter.

"The world has lost a giant. One of the greatest men who ever lived," Mr Clare posted.

The world has lost a giant. One of the greatest men who ever lived. — Jason Clare MP (@JasonClareMP) December 5, 2013

Tim Costello

Mr Mandela proved a single person can change the world no matter how bleak their situation, World Vision Australia chief Tim Costello said.

Mr Costello said a ``beacon of justice'' had been lost.

``Everyone believed it impossible for South Africa to break from apartheid without bloodshed ... yet after years of struggle Mandela led his people from oppression to equality, and his nation from shame to dignity,'' Mr Costello said in a statement on Friday.

``This man's ability to forgive, and to reach out to whites after decades of black oppression was a miracle in our lifetime.''

He said Mr Mandela, who was incarcerated in the notorious Robben Island prison for 18 years, proved ``the darkest place, depending on your response, can be a place of light and learning''.