The late anti-apartheid icon, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela left an estate valued at more than 46 million Rand (USD $4.14 million), a public reading of his will revealed earlier today.

The final wishes of South Africa’s former president were revealed midday at the Nelson Mandela Center of Memory in Johannesburg, South Africa. Executor Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke announced in a statement late Sunday that: “The executors in the estate...invite you to a media briefing on the contents of his last will and testament.” Justice Moseneke, Judge President of the Eastern Cape Themba Sangoni and prominent human rights lawyer George Bizos were named as executors of Mandela's last will and testament last year.

Moseneke, summarizing what he said was a 40-page document said the will was put together on 12 October 2004 with final amendments made in 2008. The summary of Mandela's will did not deal with issues of customary law in South Africa.

Moseneke also said that Mandela wanted the executors to consult with his wife Ms. Graca Machel, his eldest daughter from his first marriage, Mrs. Makaziwe Mandela Amuah and Mrs. Zenani Mandela Dlamini, his daughter with ex-wife Mrs. Winnie Madikizela Mandela, on important decisions and family matters.

Mandela's will covered bequests to his children and grandchildren from each of his three wives, Ms. Graca Machel and former wives, Mrs. Winnie Madikizela Mandela and Mrs. Evelyn Mandela who passed away in 2004. President Mandela and Ms. Graca Machel were married in community of property and therefore she is entitled to half of his estate. According to Moseneke, although Ms. Graca Machel has 90 days to contest the will, she agreed to waive all claim to Mandela’s estate. The mood of Mandela family when the will was read privately, prior to the press conference was described by Moseneke as "charged with emotions but it went well and… there were clarifications sought from time to time."

Bequests of 50,000 Rand ($ 4,490.99 USD) were made to various staff members including Zelda Le Grange, Mandela's long time former private secretary. Mandela bequeathed 1,5 million Rand to the Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Family Trust and left royalties to the trust of which a percentage (10% minimum and 30% maximum) would be given to the African National Congress. Moseneke noted that the 46 million Rand (USD $4.13m) valuation of Mandela's estate was subject to final verification and excluded royalties.

Mandela donated 100,000 Rand ($ 8,981.98 USD) for scholarships to four educational institutions which he attended; Clarke Institution in Transkei, Hilltown Institution, University of Fort Hare and University of the Witwatersrand. He also donated 100,000 Rand ($ 8,981.98 USD) to Qunu Secondary School in his childhood hometown and Orlando West High School in Soweto where he once lived.

Mandela passed away at his Johannesburg home on 5th December of last year at the age of 95. He was buried in his childhood hometown, Qunu in the Eastern Cape on 15th December at a funeral service attended by 4,000 people.

Read the full will here.

Follow me on Twitter @FaraiToday.