Bir Lehlou (liberated territories), Dec 6, 2013 (SPS) - The President of the Republic, Secretary General of the Polisario Front Mr. Mohamed Abdelaziz has sent a letter of condolences to H.E. Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa, following the passing away of the former president Nelson Mandela around 20h50 on December 5th, 2013.

“It was with overwhelming sadness and deep sorrow that we learnt about the death of Former President Nelson Mandela who died on Thursday at the age of 95,” writes President Mohamed Abdelaziz.

He expressed, on behalf of the Government and the people of the Sahrawi Republic (SADR), "heartfelt condolences and deepest sympathies" to the brotherly people of South Africa and to the family of the deceased at this painful time.

The letter went on saying that the Sahrawi people, who are still struggling for their freedom and independence, “are joining the whole world today in mourning one of the most charismatic and revered statesmen of the 20th century.”

Saharawi President added that Nelson Mandela “will be remembered not only as a the emancipator of his people and the first President of free and democratic South Africa but also as a beacon of hope and a source of great inspiration to all peoples in the world that are struggling against tyranny and oppression.”

South African President Jacob Zuma has announced that the former President Nelson Mandela passed away on Thursday evening, 5 December.

Following is a complete text of the condolences letter sent by Mr. Mohamed Abdelaziz, President of the Republic and Secretary General of the Frente Polisario, to Mr. Jacob Zuma, President of the Republic of South Arica, following the death of Nelson Mandela:

“Bir Lehlou, 5 December 2013

H.E. Mr Jacob Zuma,

President of the Republic of South Africa

Pretoria

Excellency and Dear Brother,

It was with overwhelming sadness and deep sorrow that we learnt about the death of Former President Nelson Mandela who died on Thursday at the age of 95.

On behalf of the Government and the people of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, I would like to extend to you, to the brotherly people of the Republic of South Africa and to the family of the deceased our most heartfelt condolences and deepest sympathies at this painful time.

Former President Nelson Mandela was not only South Africa’s greatest son but was also Africa’s and the world’s greatest son. Because he did not belong to South Africa alone, the whole world is now mourning the loss of a great man who spent nearly one-third of his life in prison and struggled heroically to deliver his people from the dark days of the racist and oppressive apartheid system.

During his tenure as President of South Africa, he spared no effort to deal with the legacy of apartheid by combating institutionalised racism, poverty and inequality, and fostering peace, reconciliation and social justice. For his peaceful resistance to apartheid and exemplary leadership, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 as recognition for his pivotal role in leading the peaceful transition of power in South Africa that has led to significant changes in the political, economic and social landscape of the country.

Nelson Mandela will be remembered not only as a the emancipator of his people and the first President of free and democratic South Africa but also as a beacon of hope and a source of great inspiration to all peoples in the world that are struggling against tyranny and oppression. His lifetime resistance to apartheid and his emblematic journey from prison to the presidency in South Africa showed the world that however brutal the colonial oppression might be, the will of the oppressed people would eventually prevail.

The Sahrawi people, who are still struggling for their freedom and independence, are joining the whole world today in mourning one of the most charismatic and revered statesmen of the 20th century.

The late Mandela once said that, “when a man has done what he considers to be his duty to his people and his country, he can rest in peace”. Indeed, Mandela has outstandingly accomplished his mission and his duty to his people and to humanity at large, and for that he will rest in peace for the eternity.

Please accept, Excellency and Dear Brother, the assurances of my highest consideration.

H.E. Mr Mohamed Abdelaziz,

President of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic

Secretary-General of the Frente POLISARIO” (SPS)

090/089