Minister of State and of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers and

Official Spokesperson for the Government of Timor-Leste

Díli, December 9, 2013

The Government of Timor-Leste extends condolences for the loss of Nelson Mandela

The Nation of Timor-Leste expresses its extreme sadness at the passing of Nelson Mandela. We extend to his wife Graça and his family our profound sympathy and condolences.

We are in mourning as we contemplate the great loss to not only his family, and his beloved country, but to all the Peoples of the world. Mandela was truly a citizen of humanity, known, admired and loved by all. Whilst the world is the poorer for his passing it is infinitely richer for having had him as one of the few universal leaders.

It will always be remembered, in one of our nation's greatest times of need, Mandela, who was then President of South Africa, reached out his hand in friendship, demonstrating political support and solidarity, for which we are and will forever remain eternally grateful.

While this is a time of great sadness to the world, it is also a time to celebrate the triumphs of his life as a great hero to our global community. Triumphs not only for South Africa but also in promoting peace and harmony amongst and between global leaders, States, regions, communities and Peoples. We can only aim to strive to maintain his spirit of integrity, and to forward the causes he sacrificed so much of his life for.

Nelson Mandela studied law and acted against apartheid (white only rule) as a member of what became known as the African National Congress (ANC). Arrested in 1962 and sentenced to five years, Mandela was shortly after charged with sabotage, extending his sentence to life imprisonment. Mr Mandela used the court hearing to deliver what became known as the manifesto of the anti-apartheid movement. Upon his release, 27 years later, Mr Mandela worked with the new President F.W. de Klerk to end the white minority policies in South Africa, and promote tolerance and acceptance amongst humanity as a whole. The pair received a Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 for their role in the ending of apartheid.

In 1994, Nelson Mandela was appointed as South Africa’s first black President. Leaving office five years later, he campaigned to raise awareness and abolish taboos surrounding HIV Aids while dedicating his time to peace building with pivotal roles in negotiations in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi and other countries in Africa and around the world. He passes at age 95. May he rest in peace and his legacy of peace, tolerance and acceptance forever be remembered. END

To read the Letter of Condolences of the Prime Minister, click here.