Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

The queen will honour the memory of Nelson Mandela with a service at Westminster Abbey – the first of its kind for a non-British citizen.

Her Majesty, 87, was deeply ­saddened by his death and wanted to attend this week’s funeral but has been advised to avoid long-haul trips for travel and security reasons.

Abbey spokesman Duncan Jeffery said last night: “There will be a thanksgiving service which we are looking to hold in the New Year.”

The Sunday People was told of the historic ­ceremony after Mandela’s grieving family spoke for the first time of their beloved Madiba’s death saying “his spirit is still with us.”

In a statement from the family’s Johannesburg home in, where widow Graca Machel is being comforted by ­relatives, they said they “have lost a great man, a son of the soil.”

Prince Charles and Camilla are expected to pass on the Queen’s condolences to Graca at services in South Africa this week. PM David Cameron and Labour leader Ed Miliband will also fly out.

Aware that she would be unable to travel, the Queen held discussions about her London service with the South African High Commission as far back as June, when it was feared Mandela could die at any time.

(Image: Getty)

Mandela’s friend and anti-­apartheid campaigner Archbishop Desmond Tutu would be expected to play a prominent role.

The Queen had a warm friendship with Mandela.

He referred to her as “My friend, Elizabeth”, she referred to him as “this wonderful man”.

She was quick to meet him ­following his release from jail, going out of her way to welcome him at a Commonwealth summit in 1991, even though he wasn’t a head of state at the time.

Mr Jeffery added: “We have not confirmed a date, but we are looking at the extent of the congregation.”

He also said discussions were under way to decide if the ­memorial will be public or invite-only, as well as the cost of such an event.

But royal ­family members and prominent politicians are certain to attend.

This week David Cameron and Ed Miliband will fly out for the official memorial service in Johannesburg on Tuesday.

But the PM and Labour leader were undecided over whether to stay on for Sunday’s state funeral. Deputy PM Nick Clegg had not made up his mind last night.

Yesterday the PM wrote to Graca and South Africa president Jacob Zuma.

Mr Cameron said: “Nelson Mandela gave the world new hope the deepest wounds can be healed and freedom and reconciliation can triumph over division and hate.

“He will forever have a distinguished place in history.

"It falls to all of us and future generations to learn from him and try to realise his extraordinary legacy.”

Dignitaries from across the world had been expected to attend the state funeral at Mandela’s home and final resting place at the family home in the Eastern Cape.

But the prospect of vast security teams swarming around the tiny village of Qunu – accessed by one road – has prompted a review.

As well as the logistical problems involved in flying in mourners by helicopter, leaders will be too pressed for time to spend four days in South Africa.

But they will be loathe to miss Mandela’s ­funeral, and will not want to be seen to be snubbing it.

(Image: WENN)

Instead, heads of state are being encouraged to attend the 95,000-strong memorial service on Tuesday at the 2010 World Cup soccer stadium in Johannesburg.

President Barack Obama will fly in for that and visit Mandela’s body lying in state in Pretoria next day.

The remains of Mandela, who died at the age of 95 following a long illness, are to be given a guard of honour by millions of South Africans invited to line the streets for the three days he lies there from Wednesday to Friday.

Government spokesman Neo Momodu said: “Every morning, when the remains leave the ­mortuary to the lying in state, those routes will be made public.”

Mandela will lie in state at the Union Buildings. Access to the lying in state will be strictly controlled.

Mayor Patricia de Lille said a series of other events would be held across the city alongside the national plan to commemorate Mandela’s life .

More moving tributes to Mandela came yesterday from leading ­politician and his close friend Mosiuoa Lekota, who said: “My heart aches: My friend, comrade and mentor has passed on and I will miss him forever.

“I watched this morning as ­tributes to Madiba poured in from all over the world; tributes that were heartfelt and meaningful, but were clearly prepared in advance of a day we all knew was coming.”

Lekota said he had prepared nothing, because “his heart would not allow him”.

He added: “Now I have no choice. His physical presence has indeed left us, but his legacy and ­indomitable spirit live on forever in my heart, the hearts of a nation and, the hearts of a world.”