Story highlights Elite troops, snipers, canines helping secure stadium

Government minister says security is in place for Tuesday's memorial

A state funeral will take place Sunday

Mandela aide describes sadness and celebration among friends and relatives in his home

It's a moment for the ages.

Tens of thousands of South Africans, dozens of presidents and prime ministers, celebrities and street sweepers are all heading to the same place: a stadium in Johannesburg, where they'll honor Nelson Mandela at a memorial service on Tuesday.

With 91 heads of state attending, security will be tight.

Authorities are already stepping up surveillance as presidents of six nations prepare to pay tribute to the late anti-apartheid leader in a four-hour service that will likely bring much of South Africa to a stop.

Working off plans developed for years in secret, the South African government is using an elite military task force, sniper teams and canine teams to help secure the stadium, CNN's Arwa Damon reported Monday. In addition, helicopters and military jets frequently fly overhead.

Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Nelson Mandela, the prisoner-turned-president who reconciled South Africa after the end of apartheid, died on December 5, 2013. He was 95. Hide Caption 1 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela became president of the African National Congress Youth League in 1951. Hide Caption 2 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela poses for a photo, circa 1950. Hide Caption 3 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela poses in boxing gloves in 1952. Hide Caption 4 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela in the office of Mandela & Tambo, a law practice set up in Johannesburg by Mandela and Oliver Tambo to provide free or affordable legal representation to black South Africans. Hide Caption 5 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – From left: Patrick Molaoa, Robert Resha and Mandela walk to the courtroom for their treason trial in Johannesburg. Hide Caption 6 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Nelson and Winnie Mandela raise their fists to salute a cheering crowd upon his 1990 release from Victor Verster Prison. He was still as upright and proud, he would say, as the day he walked into prison 27 years before. Hide Caption 7 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – A jubilant South African holds up a newspaper announcing Mandela's release from prison at an ANC rally in Soweto on February 11, 1990. Two days later, more than 100,000 people attended a rally celebrating his release from jail. Hide Caption 8 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela and Zambian President Kenneth Kaunda arrive at an ANC rally on March 3, 1990, in Lusaka, Zambia. Mandela was elected president of the ANC the next year. Hide Caption 9 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – After his release in 1990, Mandela embarked on a world tour, meeting U.S. President George H.W. Bush at the White House in June. Hide Caption 10 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – At his Soweto home on July 18, 1990, Mandela blows out the candles on his 72nd birthday cake. It was the first birthday he celebrated as a free man since the 1960s. Hide Caption 11 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela and his wife react to supporters during a visit to Brazil at the governor's palace in Rio De Janeiro, on August 1, 1991. Hide Caption 12 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – South African President Frederik de Klerk, right, and Mandela shared a Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 for their work to secure a peaceful transition from apartheid rule. Hide Caption 13 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela votes for the first time in his life on March 26, 1994. Hide Caption 14 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – On April 27, 1994, a long line of people snake toward a polling station in the black township of Soweto outside of Johannesburg in the nation's first all-race elections. Hide Caption 15 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela in Mmabatho for an election rally on March 15, 1994. Hide Caption 16 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela was elected president in the first open election in South African history on April 29, 1994. He's pictured here taking the oath at his inauguration in May, becoming the nation's first black president. Hide Caption 17 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela, left, cheers as Springbok Rugby captain Francois Pienaar holds the Webb Ellis trophy high after winning the World Cup Rugby Championship in Johannesburg on June 24, 1995. Hide Caption 18 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – After one term as president, Mandela stepped down. Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki, at right, was sworn in as his replacement in June 1999. Hide Caption 19 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela sits outside his former prison cell on Robben Island on November 28, 2003, ahead of his AIDS benefit concert at Green Point Stadium in Cape Town. He was sent to the infamous prison five miles off the coast of South Africa, where he spent 18 of his 27 years behind bars. Hide Caption 20 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela shows something to a group of international journalists visiting the Nelson Mandela Foundation in Johannesburg in May 2004. Hide Caption 21 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela sits with his wife, Graca Machel, and his grandchildren at his son's funeral on January 15, 2005. He disclosed that his son, Makgatho Lewanika Mandela, had died of AIDS and said the disease should be given publicity so people would stop viewing it as extraordinary. Hide Caption 22 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – The "46664 Arctic" benefit concert was held in Tromso, Norway, on June 11, 2005. 46664 was Mandela's identification number in prison. Here, artists who performed at the event surround him. Hide Caption 23 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela attends an HIV/AIDs concert in Johannesburg on February 17, 2005. Hide Caption 24 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Former U.S. President Bill Clinton leans down to whisper to former South African President Nelson Mandela during a visit to the Nelson Mandela Foundation on July 19, 2007, in Johannesburg. Hide Caption 25 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – A bronze statue of Mandela was unveiled in Parliament Square in London on August 29, 2007. The 9-foot statue faces the Houses of Parliament. Hide Caption 26 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela leaves the InterContinental Hotel after a photoshoot with celebrity photographer Terry O'Neil on June 26, 2008, in London. Hide Caption 27 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Mandela meets in 2009 with international children as part of his 46664 Foundation. Hide Caption 28 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Nelson Mandela and his third wife, Graca Machel, arrive at the 2010 World Cup before the final match between Netherlands and Spain on July 11, 2010, at Soccer City Stadium in Soweto. Hide Caption 29 of 30 Photos: The evolution of Nelson Mandela The evolution of Nelson Mandela – Then-U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton meets with Mandela at his home in Qunu, South Africa, on August 6, 2012. Hide Caption 30 of 30

JUST WATCHED Mandela funeral poses security concerns Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Mandela funeral poses security concerns 03:08

JUST WATCHED Planning for the Mandela memorial service Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Planning for the Mandela memorial service 04:22

JUST WATCHED Bono: Mandela chose love over hate Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Bono: Mandela chose love over hate 01:07

"Should anybody, anything dare to disturb or disrupt this period of mourning and finally taking and accompanying the former president to his last resting place, then that person will be dealt with," Brig. Gen. Xolani Mabanga said Monday.

South African officials won't give details about their security plans -- how many police officers, how many troops, precautions to keep the stadium weapons- and explosives-free.

"But we can assure that all necessary steps have been taken, and that is why the leadership of the world and former leaders of the world have confidence to come to our country at this time to share with us this moment," said Minister in the Presidency Collins Chabane.

The event promises to rival other significant state funerals in recent decades, such as that of former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill in 1965 and the 2005 funeral of Pope John Paul II, which attracted some 2 million people to Rome -- among them four kings, five queens, at least 70 presidents and prime ministers and the leaders of 14 other faiths.

At that event, metal detectors and some 15,000 members of security forces stood watch over the event.

U.S. official: South Africa experienced at hosting crowds

U.S. officials are satisfied with security arrangements.

"We have not heard any concerns," Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes told reporters aboard Air Force One as President Barack Obama flew to South Africa.

"The South Africans hosted the World Cup, so they have experience hosting significant crowds and managing events like this, although clearly this is really a unique event in world history, given the number of leaders coming to pay their respects, as well as the people of South Africa."

Given Mandela's ailing health, the U.S. Secret Service made some arrangements in advance, a Secret Service spokesman said. But work that would usually take months to complete has been done in less than a week, the spokesman said.

"It's a compressed timeline, but there are certain protocols we must have in place for any trip," the spokesman said.

Those protocols involve securing the president's motorcade route and hotel rooms and doing security walk-throughs.

The spokesman declined to offer specific details on security measures at the stadium.

While Tuesday's memorial is the first major event honoring Mandela since his death, it won't be the last.

A state funeral will be held Sunday in Mandela's ancestral hometown of Qunu in South Africa's Eastern Cape province.

Presidents set to speak at service

JUST WATCHED Four presidents head to Mandela funeral Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Four presidents head to Mandela funeral 03:05

JUST WATCHED Mandela memorial security preps Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Mandela memorial security preps 02:33

JUST WATCHED Mandela through the years Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Mandela through the years 09:01

JUST WATCHED How Mandela shaped a new South Africa Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH How Mandela shaped a new South Africa 07:14

Among the speakers at Tuesday's memorial will be President Obama, who like Mandela was his nation's first black president. Obama has cited Mandela as his own inspiration for entering politics.

In addition to Obama, former Presidents Jimmy Carter, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton will attend. More than two dozen U.S. lawmakers also plan to go.

Other guests include the Prince of Wales, British Prime Minister David Cameron and U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who will also speak, as well as celebrities such as Bono, Oprah Winfrey and Naomi Campbell.

Crews worked overtime Monday to prepare FNB Stadium in Johannesburg for the service.

The stadium, where Mandela delivered his first major speech after his release from prison, can hold some 90,000 people, but that won't be enough to hold the hundreds of thousands clamoring to celebrate Mandela's life.

The government has set up overflow locations at stadiums and other facilities throughout the country.

With private vehicles banned from the area around the stadium, the government pressed buses from around the country into service and stepped up train service to move the crowds.

In addition to Obama and Ban, the presidents of Brazil, Namibia, India, Cuba and South Africa are expected to speak at the service, as are family members, friends and others.

One potential complication: Forecasters predicted potentially heavy rainfall during the event at the open-air stadium.

Monday events

South Africa's Parliament reconvened Monday for an afternoon of speeches and memorials to Mandela. Dozens of members of parliament spoke.

"The world over, his name has evolved into a metaphor," Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe said. "The name Nelson Mandela has entered the pantheon of history's sages."

Out of the public eye, friends who had not seen each other in years have been coming together with Mandela's family in his home, said Zelda la Grange, Mandela's longtime personal assistant.

Mandela called la Grange his "rock," even though she seemed an unlikely confidante. She was a white Afrikaner and an employee of the former apartheid government.

In her first interview since Mandela's death, she described the mood in his home to CNN's Robyn Curnow on Monday.