Nelson Mandela made a big impact during his 95 years of life, and news of his passing prompted celebrities to reflect on the late South African revolutionary.

Morgan Freeman, who played the global icon in the 2009 film “Invictus,” said he hoped Mandela’s lessons would carry on throughout humanity.

“Today the world lost one of the true giants of the past century. Nelson Mandela was a man of incomparable honor, unconquerable strength, and unyielding resolve — a saint to many, a hero to all who treasure liberty, freedom and the dignity of humankind,” a statement from Freeman said. “As we remember his triumphs, let us, in his memory, not just reflect on how far we’ve come, but on how far we have to go. Madiba may no longer be with us, but his journey continues on with me and with all of us.”

PHOTOS: Stars We Lost In 2013

Idris Elba, who plays Mandela in the new film “Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom,” issued a statement.

“What an honor it was to step into the shoes of Nelson Mandela and portray a man who defied odds, broke down barriers, and championed human rights before the eyes of the world. My thoughts and prayers are with his family,” the actor’s statement read.

WATCH: Mandela’s Granddaughters Reflect On Grandfather’s Imprisonment



Singer Josh Groban Tweeted about the leader’s death, using Mandela’s clan name.

“We have lost one of humanity’s greatest treasures. RIP Madiba. I will never forget the lessons learned from him or his vision that lives on,” he wrote.

Former First Daughter Chelsea Clinton said the world is better because Mandela was in it.

“My thoughts and prayers are with Graca Machel & the Mandela family. We are all the richer for Madiba’s extraordinary life,” she Tweeted.

British actor Simon Pegg wrote, “Bricks from the wall of Nelson Mandela’s house in Soweto, SA. #RIPMandela,” with a series of photos displaying the words “EQUALITY,” “COURAGE” and “FREEDOM.”

Whoopi Goldberg Tweeted, “I want 2give the world a hug I was told Mandeba just passed. Nelson Mandela R.I.P. Time for a well earned sleep.Condolences to his family.”

William Shatner wrote, “I hope the great work started by Nelson Mandela continues to spread across the world. He will be remembered as an icon for equality.”

Lisa Leslie ‏wrote, “We have lost a fearless humanitarian and leader in Nelson Mandela! His spirit and will to do the right thing will live on! #Mandela.”

WATCH: Nelson Mandela’s Granddaughters Share Memories Of Their Grandfather’s Imprisonment

LeVar Burton Tweeted, “A great Soul has left us!!!! Nelson Mandela… Rest in Peace!”

Here’s what more stars had to say on social media:

Amber Patrice Riley: #RIPNelsonMandela

David Morrissey: RIP Nelson Mandela. 1918-2013

Wayne Brady: RIP Nelson Mandela. Selfless humanitarian. Leader.

Clark Gregg: “As we let our own light shine, we unconsciously give other people permission to do the same. As we are liberated from our own fear…our presence automatically liberates others.” Rest In Peace Nelson Mandela

Willie Garson: RIP Nelson Mandela……may we all strive to make the world a little better…..

Bryan Greenberg: RIP Nelson Mandela. True champion of freedom and equality for all.

Michael Moore: Thank you, Nelson Mandela. Freedom.

E L James: RIP Nelson Mandela. #Humanitarian #Peacemaker #FatherofSouthAfrica

Colton Haynes: :( RIP #NelsonMandela

Padma Lakshmi: So sad to hear of Nelson Mandela’s passing. What a life well lived! RIP

OneRepublic: R.I.P Nelson Mandela

Edi Gathegi: Mandela. A hero has left us. May your legacy continue to inspire and uplift us all.

Donald Faison: RIP Nelson Mandela.

Adam Lambert: RIP Mandela

Melissa Joan Hart: God Bless Nelson Mandela and his family! What a long and meaningful life! Rest in Eternal Peace! #rip

Kat Graham: I learned that courage was not the absence of fear, but the triumph over it. - Nelson Mandela Rest In Peace

Enrique Iglesias: The world has lost someone truly inspiring. Rest in peace Nelson Mandela

Jason George: Driving & had 2 pull over #NelsonMandela has gone home Anyone alive @ Apartheid’s end felt his power & presence MLK, Gandhi & now Mandela

Chuck D: The mission to FREE Mandela was woven into the blueprint of PublicEnemy using RAP & Hip Hop to recognize THIS MAN RIP

Russell Simmons: Nelson Mandela was an angel walking on this earth. You were one the greatest teachers this world has ever known. We love you and we miss you

Buzz Aldrin: Rest in Peace Nelson Mandela. A true inspiration & role model for peace & international collaboration. We will continue to learn from him.

Lynda Carter: I join the people of South Africa and the world in honoring the life of Nelson Mandela. His commitment to freedom and equality and his dignity will be remembered forever throughout the world.

Michael Ealy: THANK YOU NELSON MANDELA. LONG LIVE YOUR LEGACY & YOUR WORDS BUT MOST IMPORTANTLY YOUR SPIRIT! THX 4 YOUR CONTRIBUTION TO OUR WORLD. #CHANGE

Max George: RIP Nelson Mandela. A truly great man. Thoughts with his family

Chris Tucker: Prayers go out the Mandela family. #RIPMandela

Noah Emmerich: RIP Nelson Mandela. As good as we get.

Carole King: Nelson Mandela’s long walk has ended, but his path remains to light our way. Rest in peace

Jason O’Mara: Hard to imagine a world without Nelson Mandela in it. One of the greatest heroes of our time, or any other. RIP

Fergie: Meeting Nelson Mandela at his house in Johannesburg was a truly memorable moment in life for me. He was an angel.

Sam Claflin: #RIP Nelson Mandela. A true inspiration. A true legend.

Gene Simmons: Nelson Mandela sadly passed away. A sad day. A great man.

Kareem Abdul-Jabbar: Nelson Mandela was a great man. A bright light has gone out. His ability to lead & inspire are unparalleled in my lifetime.

Katherine Heigl: Deeply saddened to hear of the passing of Nelson Mandela. An inspiration to all who value freedom, democracy and equality.

David Blaine: Here’s to the greatest magician of all, a man that turned hatred into peace. #NelsonMandela

Nicholas Sparks: The world is a sadder place now that Nelson Mandela has been asked to join our Lord in heaven. His memory and lessons will live forever.

Lionel Richie: Nelson Mandela was a father to all of us. May his life be a constant reminder, that we are all ONE WORLD. He will be missed - LR

Val Kilmer: I just heard: 1 of the angels on earth has passed. Nelson Mandela is a triumph of love over hate. I had a private audience once: he WAS love

David Harewood: RIP Nelson Mandela. We will never see his like again.

Robert Kazinsky: I don’t usually post RIP’s as I feel they’re all a but false, but when titans fall; Rest in great peace Nelson Mandela.

Charlize Theron: My thoughts and love go out to the Mandela family. Rest in Peace Madiba. You will be missed, but your impact on this world will live forever

Harry Connick, Jr.: thank you nelson mandela. RIP

Julian Lennon: R.I.P. Nelson… You were a One of a kind… My thoughts & Prayers are with his Family & Friends Today

Jeff Perry: Thank God Nelson Mandela walked the earth in our lifetime. RIP

Ian Somerhalder: Im in tears.The world has lost one of its greatest shepherds of peace.Thank you Mr.Mandela for the love you radiated.

Jennifer Hudson: Mr. Mandela fought for freedoms and equality that changed South Africa and the world. We can all learn from his extraordinary journey

Hugh Jackman: Nelson Mandela… the definition of grace, dignity and inspiration. His light will shine on. May he rest in peace. @Deborra_lee

Tiger Woods: You will always be in my heart Mr. Mandela.

Michelle Obama: We will forever draw strength and inspiration from Nelson Mandela’s extraordinary example of moral courage, kindness, and humility.

Rob Lowe: If ever there was someone who’s epitaph shouldn’t be reduced to “RIP”, it’s Nelson Mandela. His spirit was a weapon for change and love.

Eddie Izzard: Nelson Mandela gives us a legacy that all of humanity can aspire to. Read his story for he might be the greatest person that has ever lived

Marie Osmond: Today we mourn the loss of Nelson Mandela, a truly magnificent man of peace & love. May his spirit live on in all of us! #RIPNelsonMandela

Rachel Zoe: Rest in peace Nelson Mandela…it’s incredible how much of a difference one person can make in the world. His spirit will live on forever.

Victoria Justice: R.I.P. Nelson Mandela. A brave soul who inspired millions & made a legendary impact on the world. #ThankYou #GreatHuman

Sarah Shahi: Good bye Mr. Mandela. The world lost a beautiful, inspiring man. See you on the other side. RIP

Maggie Q: Mandela. A man with more fight in him than the world that fought against him. NEVER gone. NEVER EVER forgotten.Blessed to witness this man in our lifetime.

Will.i.am: Nelson Mandela…I’m so sad…#theWORLDisCRYING

Kristin Chenoweth: i cant believe hes gone. RIP Nelson Mandela

Rosie ‏O’Donnell: “For to be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way that respects and enhances the freedom of others.” RIP#Mandela

