The pro-government, or Antimaidan protests, sprouted up quickly -- and suspiciously -- a few days after the anti-government protests erupted, critics say.

Supporters of President Viktor Yanukovych rally in central Kiev, Ukraine, on Jan. 28, 2014. (Photo: Sergei Chuzavkov, AP) Story Highlights Many tell USA TODAY they regularly receive money to stage rallies supporting Ukrainian president

Nation is in its most severe political crisis in the 22 years since it gained independence from former Soviet Union

Anti-government protests have grown into a movement known as Euromaidan

Correction: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified the amount a pro-government demonstrator said she received in public child support. Galina Tsariuk said she receives 1,000 Ukrainian hryvnia ($117) a month in public child support.



KIEV, Ukraine — Several times a week, in spite of being unemployed, construction worker Sergey Meleshko starts his day at 4 a.m.

With dozens of other residents of Vatutino, a small town in central Ukraine, the 44-year-old boards a rickety bus and takes the five-hour ride to Kiev, the Ukrainian capital. He then marches around the city center shouting slogans and holding signs in support of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych.

After about six hours, he says he receives 200 Ukrainian hryvnia, or around $24, boards the bus again and goes home.

Meleshko and others say that hundreds of people regularly receive money to stage rallies engineered by Ukrainian officials to provide a counterweight the ongoing anti-government protests calling for Yanukovych's resignation.

"I only do it for money," Meleshko said, adding he doesn't fear retribution.

As Ukraine suffers its most severe political crisis in the 22 years since it gained independence from the former Soviet Union, critics say the payments for pro-government demonstrators prove that Yanukovych lacks popular support.

Having occupied Independence Square in the heart of Kiev since late November, when the failure of a long-anticipated trade deal with the European Union sparked outrage over Yanukovych's pro-Russian administration, the anti-government protests have grown into a countrywide, pro-Western movement known as Euromaidan, or "Euro Square" in Ukrainian.

On Monday, one of the leaders of the movement, former boxer Vitali Klitschko, will be meeting with German leaders as EU officials continue to push for both sides to agree to constitutional reform that would trim presidential powers and bolster those of Parliament.

Protesters work on a barricade on Independence Square in Kiev, Ukraine, on Feb. 14, 2014. (Photo: Martin Bureau, AFP/Getty Images)

Even so, the pro-government, or Antimaidan protests, sprouted up quickly — and suspiciously — a few days after the anti-government protests erupted, critics say. Antimaidan demonstrators typically carry flags for Yanukovych's Party of Regions, too.

"People stand at Euromaidan protesting against the violation of human rights in the state, and they are ready to make sacrifices," said Oleksiy Haran, a political scientist at Kyiv Mohyla Academy in Kiev. "People at Antimaidan stand for money only. The government uses these hirelings to provoke resistance. They won't be sacrificing anything."

Based on numerous interviews with pro-government protesters — most of whom declined to give their names or speak publicly — few show up free of charge.

"Don't think we do it because we really support the Party of Regions," said Meleshko. "The more money I'll suck out of them, the less they'll have to fake the next elections."

Meleshko said he's earned around $920 since joining the pro-government rallies in December. In Vatutino, $280 is considered a good monthly wage. But unemployment in Ukraine's provinces is high. Meleshko and his neighbors are happy to earn easy cash even if it entails eight hours of commuting in a day.

"There is a competition to get here," said Meleshko. "There is a list of regular-goers, and a backup list of those who go when somebody can't make it."

Supporters of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rally in central Kiev, Ukraine, on Jan. 28, 2014. (Photo: Sergei Chuzavkov, AP)

Protesters said those who stay at the government rally 24 hours a day earn as much as $94 per diem, the highest amount possible.

Still, Yanukovych has numerous true supporters in the country, and some say they don't need to be paid to show their allegiance.

Pro-government demonstrator Galina Tsariuk, a 32-year old hairdresser from Kiev, said she's "an authentic" Yanukovych supporter. She denied receiving money for her participation. "We do it for free, for the idea," she said, standing in the middle of a park occupied by pro-government protesters.

Tsariuk backed Yanukovych in part, she said, because the government provides her with generous monthly child-care benefits. A mother of two, she receives 1,000 Ukrainian hryvnia ($117) a month in public child support. She also dislikes how anti-government protesters have lined downtown Kiev with barricades and shut down parts of the city center.

"Whenever I have time I come here," she said.

Meanwhile, Meleshko says that unfortunately, pro-government organizers are calling him less frequently lately. He misses December and January, when he would be called and paid to travel to Kiev every day.

If the money ever dries up, he might cross the battle lines, he said. He'd be particularly interested in joining the ad hoc security units that protesters have formed to protect themselves against the special police officers who have at times brutally cracked down on them.

"Once it ends and they stop paying me, I may go to the Euromaidan for free," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eE3egf