Ukraine launches air strike and sends in paratroopers after pro-Russian rebels seize Donetsk airport

Pro-Russian rebels had taken over parts of the airport in eastern city

All flights were cancelled and civilians and journalists caught in crossfire



Air strikes came after Petro Poroshenko, 48, was named as new President



Chocolate magnate said he will not negotiate with 'terrorists' and 'bandits'



But Kremlin told Ukraine to end 'military operations against its own people'

Ukraine also struck own city of Slovyansk, leaving shrapnel-hit civilians dead







Ukraine launched an air strike on pro-Russian rebels and sent in paratroopers today after the separatists seized Donetsk airport in violent scenes.



Government jets and a helicopter struck against the militants, who arrived at the airport in the eastern city and demanded the withdrawal of government patrols.

As darkness fell tonight, it was unclear who controlled the airport. Hundreds of fighters were in the area, armed with rocket-propelled grenade launchers and automatic rifles.



Civilians and journalists were caught in the crossfire, which came a day after billionaire chocolate magnate Petro Poroshenko was elected as Ukraine's new President - and warned he would not negotiate with 'terrorists' and 'bandits'.



Scroll down for video - WARNING GRAPHIC CONTENT



Strike: A Ukrainian helicopter Mi-24 gunship fires its cannons against rebels at the main terminal of Donetsk airport today. Pro-Russian rebels descended on the area today, leading to a battle of several hours

Action: The crisis in eastern Ukraine spilled over into violence, with pro-Russian separatists (pictured) coming under fire from the government after descending with guns and rocket launchers on the airport

Attack: Plumes of black smoke can be seen pouring from the airport, close to the control tower View: The black smoke billowing from Donetsk international airport could be seen from a nearby cemetery

Witnesses saw black smoke rising from Sergei Prokofiev International Airport and heard gunfire and explosions which lasted for several hours.

All flights in and out of the airport in Donetsk were cancelled after the separatists arrived and demanded the withdrawal of Ukrainian forces, who had been policing the perimeter.

The pro-Russians blocked off the road to the airport, and many civilians and journalists were caught in the crossfire. Some of the separatists were injured.

Airport spokesman Dmitry Kosinov said: 'The rebels are in the terminal. The rest of the airport area is controlled by the (Ukrainian) National Guard. The two sides are in talks now.'

Vladislav Seleznyov, a spokesman for Kiev's anti-terrorist operation, wrote on his Facebook account that the military had presented an ultimatum to unknown armed men who had occupied the airport to lay down their arms.

He said the gunmen did not comply and the military launched an air strike.

Battle: Armed pro-Russian insurgents outside Donetsk international airport (left) and on its rooftop (right) Militants: Pro-Russians arrived earlier today and demanded the withdrawal of Ukrainian patrol troops Battle: Pro-Russian separatists like the one pictured above were engaged in battle in Donetsk for several hours Warning: The descent of the separatists (pictured) came as Ukraine's new leader, the so-called Chocolate King Petro Poroshenko, announced new talks and warned he would not negotiate with 'terrorists' Action: Pro-Russian militants take position on the roof of the international airport of the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk

Caught in the crossfire: A civilian in summer shorts was forced to run for cover amid fighting near the airport On the run: Journalists flee from the fighting outside the airport amid tensions unseen since the Cold War

Home to around one million people, the eastern city of Donetsk is largely in the hands of pro-Russian separatists who prevented local people taking part in Ukraine's presidential election on Sunday.

Only about 20 per cent of the two regions' polling stations functioned in Sunday's presidential election and many voters stayed at home, fearful for their safety. No polling stations were open in the city of Donetsk.



'These are simply bandits. Nobody in any civilised state will hold negotiations with terrorists' - Ukraine's new President Petro Poroshenko



The pro-Moscow rebels reiterated their declaration of autonomous 'people's republics' in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk following makeshift referendums on May 11.

Their claim - that the two border cities are no longer part of Ukraine - has seen the escalation of tensions unseen since the Cold War.



The gunfire at the airport erupted shortly after the election victor, Petro Poroshenko, said during a news conference in the Ukrainian capital Kiev that he would not negotiate with 'terrorists'.

He said clashes should end within 'hours' and told journalists the rebels 'want to preserve a bandit state which is held in place by force of arms'.

He added: 'These are simply bandits. Nobody in any civilised state will hold negotiations with terrorists.'

Elsewhere in the country, however, civilians were killed by shrapnel after strikes by Ukrainian forces near the eastern city of Slovyansk.

The body of one woman, 60-year-old Olga Prokhorenko, lay covered in blood by the roadside.

Killed: The fighting was not limited to Donetsk airport. In the eastern city of Slovyansk, 60-year-old Olga Prokhorenko lay dead by the roadside (pictured) after being hit by shrapnel. She was attended to by medics Grief: A woman in the city of Slovyansk after seeing the body of her neighbour, a civilian killed by shrapnel

Death: Citizens react as they see the lifeless body of a man killed by shrapnel following a shelling from Ukrainian government forces in Slovyansk

Bleak: A man killed by shrapnel in the eastern city of Slovyansk today. The clashes have claimed several lives Attack: Part of a mortar shell seen near the body of Olga Prokhorenko, 60, who was killed by shrapnel

Russia, which British and U.S. leaders have accused of stirring the insurgency, urged the Ukrainian government to halt what it called a military operation against its own people.

The Kremlin called on an international monitoring mission to investigate the clashes at the airport.

'In connection with reports of armed clashes near Donetsk that have led to casualties, we urgently appeal to the leadership of the OSCE and its special monitoring mission in Ukraine to provide detailed information on the events there,' the Russian Foreign Ministry said in a statement.

'We expect objective and comprehensive information about this from representatives of the OSCE (Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe) and from the Kiev authorities - a halt to the military operations against its own people.'

A spokeswoman for the separatists said the group now at the airport was the 'East' battalion which took part in clashes last Friday with a Ukrainian militia just west of Donetsk in which at least two people were killed.

Death: A civilian was killed by gunfire outside a train station in Donetsk today. The city is held by separatists Injury: Pro-Russians helped a fellow fighter into the back of a car after he was hurt near Donetsk airport Hiding out: Pro-Russian forces (pictured) took up positions in the forest around the airport itself Taking arms: Some of the militiamen at the airport chose not to show their faces to the world's media Heavily armed: The battle between pro-Russians (pictured) and government troops rages in the streets Suburbia: Masked rebels were seen wandering through the streets near Donetsk airport during the attack

Denis Pushilin, a leader of the separatists, said they had sent their men to the airport after some of their supporters were detained.



Prior to news of the strike, Ukraine's new president-elect had promised to negotiate an end to a pro-Russia insurgency in the east and saying he was willing to begin talks with Moscow.



Russia quickly welcomed the offer from 48-year-old Mr Poroshenko, amid tensions unseen since the end of the Cold War.

Mr Poroshenko, known for his pragmatism, supports building strong ties with Europe but also has stressed the importance of mending relations with Moscow.

Upon claiming victory in Sunday's vote, he said his first step as president would be to visit the Donbass eastern industrial region, where pro-Russia separatists have seized government buildings, declared independence and battled government troops in weeks of fighting.

Surrounding: Witnesses reported seeing thick black smoke coming from within the perimeter of the airport as jets flew high overhead

Siege: A man believed to be a pro-Russian militant, armed with a gun and wearing a balaclava, takes position inside the airport Unwelcoming: A masked gunman stands alongside a sign which would normally tell arriving passengers 'Donetsk welcomes you'

Taking aim: A pro-Russian gunman is poised on the roof of the airport

'Peace in the country and peace in the east is my main priority,' Mr Poroshenko said, signaling that he would bring to an end the Ukrainian army's much-criticised campaign to drive out the separatists.



'The anti-terrorist operation cannot and should not last two or three months,' he said. 'It should and will last hours.'

The military operation has caused civilian deaths and destroyed property - angering many eastern residents - while still failing to crush the rebellion.



The president-elect also had harsh words for the pro-Russia gunmen, comparing them to Somalia pirates.



'Their goal is to turn Donbass into a Somalia where they would rule with the power of machine guns. l will never allow that to happen on the territory of Ukraine,' Mr Poroshenko said, adding that he hoped Russia would support his efforts to stabilise the east.

In Moscow, Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Russia appreciated Mr Poroshenko's statements about the importance of Ukraine's ties with Russia and his pledge to negotiate an end to fighting in the east.

Vow: Prior to news of the strike, Ukraine's new president-elect Petro Poroshenko had promised to negotiate an end to a pro-Russia insurgency in the east and saying he was willing to begin talks with Moscow

Sporting chance: Mr Poroshenko appeared alongside Kiev mayoral candidate, heavyweight boxer Vitalii Klitschko at the press-conference in Kiev today A Ukrainian helicopter gunship flies above areas where pro-Russian militias have taken position The air strikes appeared to be the most visible operation of the Ukrainian troops since they started a crackdown on insurgents last month. Pictured: A flare released by one of the Ukrainian helicopter gunships Donetsk airport authorities announced its closure to flights earlier today after the separatists arrived at the facility

'We are ready for dialogue with representatives of Kiev, with Petro Poroshenko,' Mr Lavrov said at a briefing, adding it was a chance that 'cannot be wasted.'



He emphasised that Moscow saw no need for any involvement by the United States or the European Union in those talks.



'We don't need any mediators,' he said pointedly.



Mr Lavrov also noted Russia's longstanding call for the Kiev government to end its military operation in eastern Ukraine.



The rebels vowed to block Sunday's voting in the east.

But nationwide, about 60 percent of Ukraine's 35.5 million eligible voters turned out Sunday, and long lines snaked around polling stations in the pro-Western capital, Kiev.

Weapon: A pro-Russian fighter armed with a rocket launcher during the clash with Ukrainian troops at the airport

Poised: Pro-Russian insurgents aim their rifles during fighting around the airport

Supplies: A truck carrying scored pro-Russian militants and weapons arrives close to the airport today

With votes from 75 percent of the precincts counted Monday, Mr Poroshenko was leading with about 54 percent in the field of 21 candidates.

Former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko was running a distant second with 13 percent.



If those results hold, Mr Poroshenko would avoid a runoff election next month with the second-place finisher.



Speaking to reporters, Mr Poroshenko struck a tone of unity, saying he had no 'rivals or political opponents in the race' and all of the other main candidates have congratulated him on his win.

'More than ever, Ukraine now needs to be united,' he said.



Mykhaylo Okhendovsky, chairman of the Central Election Commission, said official results would be announced by June 5.



Masked: His face covered with a camouflage scarf, this gunman stands sentry inside the usually bustling airport

Attack: The main airport in Ukraine's eastern city of Donetsk was rocked by an explosion and heavy shooting after armed rebels seized the facility

UKRAINE AND RUSSIA CLOSER TO SOLVING $2BN GAS DISPUTE

The two nations made some progress today over the $2billion still owed by Ukraine to Russian gas firm Gazprom. EU e nergy commissioner Guenther Oettinger said the two governments would study his proposal that Ukraine pay Russia $2billion by Thursday and a further $500million by June 7. He is acting as a mediator in the long-running dispute. ' We've achieved progress but we didn't achieve a breakthrough,' he said. 'I believe an agreement is possible.' But Ukraine's Energy Minister Yuri Prodan said there was no final an agreement and he would not confirm that Ukraine agreed to pay $2billion on Thursday. He said the two sides have until Wednesday night to consider it. Gazprom is charging Ukraine $485 per 1,000 cubic metres of gas - vastly more than the $370 it charges its average European clients.



The election, which came three months after pro-Moscow President Viktor Yanukovych was chased from office by crowds following months of street protests and allegations of corruption, was seen as a critical step toward resolving Ukraine's protracted crisis.

Since he was ousted in February, Russia has annexed the Crimea Peninsula in southern Ukraine.

And the interim Kiev government and the West have accused Russia of backing the current separatist uprising in the east of the country. Moscow has denied the accusations.



Unlike many other Ukrainian billionaires, Mr Poroshenko did not make his fortune in murky post-Soviet privatizations but instead built his chocolate empire from scratch.

His Willy Wonka-like chocolate stores exist across the country, helping lead to the perception that he is a 'good tycoon.'

President Barack Obama praised Ukrainians for participating in the voting 'despite provocations and violence.'