I’m sure you know this perfectly well, but may I point out that if there aren’t Russian military or Russian armament in east Ukraine, you will get nothing that matches your criteria of respectable neutral sources.

And so it is. You have quotations from psychiatric basket case Igor Girkin and newspaper articles in papers owned by oligarchs who ran against Putin for president.

But mostly you have things sourced from the Ukraine Ministry of Truth and laundered. If you have an article from Reuters that is based on an article in the Kiev Post that is based on a speech of Poroshenko, the source is Poroshenko not Reuters.

The only thing I know of that is from a respectable neutral source that has the additional quality of being clearly capable of knowing what it’s talking about is the report of the Dutch Intelligence Service that says the Donbass Militia did not have a working BUK when MH-17 was brought down.

I question the sincerity of your endeavour. You are doing a bait and switch.

You are not asking for evidence that Russia has invaded Ukraine or has deployed units in Ukraine or is a party to the war. You are not asking whether Russia is at war with Ukraine. You are not asking whether Russia is guilty of aggression against Ukraine. But those are the things that Russia has formally denied. So why aren’t you asking for evidence of those things? Because you intend to imply, are implying, that the things you do ask for mean the same thing. They do not.

Russia has not denied the specific things you ask for evidence about, nor has she ever said “We are not involved.” What does “involved” mean, anyway? What Russia has denied is definable. Russia is certainly involved to the extent that she has said officially and repeatedly that she will not allow the Russian population in Ukraine to be exterminated or ethnically cleansed.

What you seem to be asking for is “laundered” information. At any rate, that is what you have. The source is the person or agency where the information originated, not the place where you read it. If the Ukrainian Defense Ministry holds a briefing which is covered by UNIAN, reprinted in Kiev Post and picked up by a Russian online paper (owned by a Swede) the source is not Russian, the source is the Ukrainian Defense Ministry.

Perhaps you intend to clean them up, but many of these statements editorialize by the use of quotation marks.

There are egregious errors in identification (Vladimir Zhirinovsky is not a Russian army colonel) and logic (if Zhirinovsky has given “separatists” a jeep, that is proof of a non-governmental source of military supplies, not the opposite).

There is no relevant content in the paragraph on the Pskov paratroopers.

Igor Girkin is not an acceptable source. He was never “the leader of the separatists” except in his own mind. He declared himself to be such in a flyer he put up on lamp posts in Slavyansk, and that proclamation bears ample evidence that he is not in the best of mental health. It attacks Jen Psaki, for instance. He was a psychiatric discharge from the FSB in 2013. He was court-martialled and exiled by the DNR field commanders in July 2014.

The discussion between Gubarev (a “separatist leader” for less than a week in February 2014) and Kurginyan, the Russian non-system opposition leader of the group Essence of Time, is evidence of how the “separatists” get their materiel. Not the Russian government. Civilians. Kurginyan is a major supplier.