Some say they were forced out.

Journalists working in Donetsk said they had

in past weeks noticed a major exodus of previously pro-Kremlin Chechen

fighters, with no reason provided from separatist leadership as to why they

departed. The exit of the Chechen fighters, who played a prominent role when

Russia instigated the war a year ago, has triggered speculation.

A Caucasus-born separatist commander who has

taken part in fighting told the Kyiv Post that disputes between Chechen

fighters and Russian-backed separatist leader Alexander Zakharchenko in Donetsk

had been intensifying recently.

The commander said that some Chechens were

deported and others murdered, charges that Zakharchenko’s defense minister

denied.

“Zakharchenko’s men executed a bunch of them,

then a bunch of them were beaten. The Chechens who remain are still sitting in

the basement of the Donetsk SBU building. Some others have been disarmed and

deported,” the commander said, speaking on condition of anonymity for fear of

reprisals in Donetsk.

When asked for more information, he cut off

the conversation.

The picture painted by the separatist

commander was also backed up by a foreign journalist who witnessed Chechen

fighters in detention. He requested anonymity for fear of repercussions from

separatist leaders.

As separatist leaders and officials in Russia’s

Chechnya region remain tight-lipped on the issue, allegations abound that the

conflict erupted after some Chechen fighters refused to obey orders. In January, several Chechen fighters from a

battalion calling itself Diky’s Group vowed “blood revenge” against Donetsk

separatist authorities after one of their men had allegedly been killed by a

fighter. They defiantly declared that Donetsk was “their land.” Diky’s Group

comprises fighters from Tatarstan, Chechnya and Ingushetia.

The exact number of Chechen fighters in Donbas

is unknown, but members of the Death Battalion – the most prominent Chechen

group – have said their group numbers at least 300.

Eduard Basurin, the deputy defense minister of

separatist forces in Donetsk, played down the idea of a conflict between the

two sides.

Basurin told the Kyiv Post that “all the

Chechens left long ago of their own accord.” Asked specifically about the

alleged murders of Chechens, he said: “I know nothing about it.”

His comments contradicted remarks by Akhmed

Zakayev, the former prime minister of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, who

said in an interview with Radio Liberty over the weekend that a dramatic

standoff between the separatists and their former Chechen allies had been

playing out behind the scenes.

According to Zakayev, Chechen leader Kadyrov

personally recalled his men from Donetsk after a particularly gruesome incident

in which several Chechen fighters were killed in battle – all supposedly

because Zakharchenko refused to compromise with Ukrainian forces.

“There was a conflict between Zakharchenko’s

people and Kadyrov’s people,” Zakayev said, describing a dramatic skirmish

between Ukrainian forces and rebels.

Zakayev said Ukrainian forces had surrounded the rebels and demanded the

release of prisoners, but Zakharchenko refused, resulting in the death of 40

Chechen fighters.

He did not specify when the incident

occurred.

Friction between Chechen fighters and other

rebels has surfaced repeatedly in recent months, with news of one Chechen

fighter being killed by rebels in a nightclub late March.

That incident reportedly resulted in a

shoot-out in the streets of Donetsk.

“After all that, Kadyrov pulled his men out of

there,” Zakayev said.

Georgi Engelhardt, an independent expert on

Islam who monitors many Chechen affairs, expressed doubt over Zakayev’s

comments, saying it sounded more like rumors.

“There is no way to verify Zakayev’s story,”

he said, adding that the plot was realistic but the number of Chechens killed

“needs to be reviewed.”

The departure of fighters from a region of

Russia that has twice clashed in devastating wars with Moscow since the

collapse of the USSR also coincides with tensions between Kadyrov, who rules

Chechnya as his personal fiefdom while routinely pledging loyalty to Russian

President Vladimir Putin, and Russian law enforcement officials.

In late April, Kadyrov famously encouraged his

own men to “shoot to kill” any law enforcement officers from other parts of

Russia if they were caught carrying out operations in Chechnya without

permission. The comment, for which Kadyrov later apologized, came amid public

demands to question Kadyrov’s men in connection with the murder of opposition

politician Boris Nemtsov in February.

Zaur Dadayev, a former Chechen deputy

commander praised by Kadyrov as a “true patriot,” is one of the main suspects

in the case.

Last May, the Caucasian Knot news agency

reported that the bodies of dozens of Chechen men had been returned home from

Ukraine for burial, citing family members.

An information request sent to Kadyrov’s press

service went unanswered as of print time.

Kyiv Post staff writer Allison Quinn can be reached at

a.caseyquinn@gmail.com

Found a spelling error? Let us know – highlight it and press Ctrl + Enter.