As events unfold in Ukraine, the Ukraine Informational Resistance -- a network of Ukrainian professors and intellectuals in Ukraine and abroad -- will keep The WorldPost readers informed about events from their perspective.

Here is my latest report from on the ground in eastern Ukraine:

1. Extremists under the Russian flag in KAMAZ trucks emerged in the town of Antratsyt, Lugansk region.

The Ukrainian government received information about a possible attempt by car bombers in this area to cross the border into Ukraine on May 5. Prompt measures have been taken to strengthen the state border protection with the assistance of additional forces, the border guard service of Ukraine and the Ukrainian armed forces. The column of vehicles crossing the border was not recorded.

For this particular situation, special services and law enforcement officers were allocated. The version of the campaign by extremists in Donbas region which calls for the "breakout" of their fellow extremists across the Russian border is also being combated.

2. Regarding the border with Transnistria.

According to our data, for the last three days at total of 250 of "Putin's tourists" and saboteurs from the Transnistrian region entered the territory of Ukraine. Their goal is to destabilize the situation in the southern regions of our country. Peak destabilization is scheduled for May 9.

These citizens had arrived from Russia under the leadership of FSB of the Russian Federation, during March to April, about which the Informational Resistance group had already given a warning.

Ukrainian security services have taken steps to neutralize these groups of extremists.

3. Regarding Crimea.

Crimean extremists, coordinated by the secret services of Russia, continue to cross the borders into the Odessa region.

Since the border guard service forces of Ukraine on the administrative boundary of the ARC (Autonomic Republic of Crimea) controlled the entrance of the mainland citizens, infiltrators and provocateurs have changed their tactics. They, as citizens of Ukraine, living in Crimea and recruited by Russian security services, enter the continent one by one or in small groups, disguised as ordinary citizens. In close coordination with local separatists, they receive weapons upon joining the rest of the extremists in the mainland Ukraine.

Ukrainian security services have also taken measures to neutralize these saboteurs.