On

Oct. 13, several hundred soldiers of the National Guard left their military units in Kyiv and the region to

rally near the Presidential Administration, demanding the end of

draft. National Guard units are staffed though national

mobilization, but the terms of service for these particular units

have been extended several times beyond the usual one year.

Artyom

Skoropadsky, the Right Sector’s spokesman, said by phone that the

demonstration was a provocation that could have been orchestrated by

Russia’s Federal Security Service.

Interior

Minister Arsen Avakov said on Oct. 14 that the incident would be

investigated.

A heated debate during the National Guard protest on Oct. 13 in front of the president’s administration. The young soldiers demanded that the president ends the term of their mobilization.

More photos from the protest.

“Demobilization

is never above military duty and honor,” he wrote on Facebook.

“…Several hours of demobilization slogans turned these guys, most

of whom have fought (in Donbas), from respectable soldiers into young

people we’re ashamed of.”

Anton

Gerashchenko, an advisor to the interior minister, wrote on Facebook

on Oct. 13 that Russian intelligence agencies had used the situation

and were behind social network groups that coordinated the protest.

One

of their groups on Russia’s Vkontakte social network, called the

Life of a Soldier, featured a St. George ribbon, a symbol of

pro-Russian insurgents, and the Donetsk People’s Republic and

Luhansk People’s Republic hashtags.

Gerashchenko

said that the soldiers should be punished but added that the military

draft system should be changed. “What

happened today at the soldiers’ rallies proves that the military

service system urgently needs reform,” Gerashchenko said.

The

National Guard soldiers represented units 3030, 3066 and 3027.

Many

of the soldiers interviewed by the Kyiv Post on Oct. 13 said they had

clashed with protesters during the EuroMaidan revolution, when they

protected government buildings. They also said they disapproved of

the revolution.

They

said that they were hoping their demands would be met, since

EuroMaidan protesters had done the same. “Maidan

managed to achieve their goals,” Ihor, a 21-year National Guard

soldier, said. He refused to give his last name for fear of

prosecution.

Colonel General Stepan Poltorak speaks to the media in Kiev on October 13, 2014, as few hundreds of Ukrainian conscripts of former interior troops protest outside Ukraine’s President Petro Poroshenko administration building demanding their demobilization.

Anatoly

Matios, Ukraine’s chief military prosecutor and Yury Viytev,

military prosecutor of the Central District, tried for hours to

persuade the soldiers to disperse, saying that they were subject to

criminal punishment for their actions.

Stepan

Poltorak, head of the National Guard who was appointed defense

minister on Oct. 14, also talked to the demonstrators.

Andrei,

another 21-year-old guardsman, said that soldiers from the Sumy,

Zaporizhya, Kharkiv and Chernihiv oblasts were expected to join them.

But the rally ended by midnight on Oct. 13.

Several

volunteer battalion fighters also came to the presidential

administration, arguing that the National Guardsmen’s behavior was

treason.

EuroMaidan

activists also debated with the National Guardsmen. When the National

Guard soldiers said that they had been tired of serving since the

EuroMaidan Revolution, the activists wondered why they had protected

Berkut riot police from EuroMaidan demonstrators.

Kyiv

Post staff writer Oleg Sukhov can be reached at reaganx84@gmail.com.

Kyiv Post+ offers special coverage of Russia’s war against Ukraine and the aftermath of the EuroMaidan Revolution.

Found a spelling error? Let us know – highlight it and press Ctrl + Enter.