Ceasefire talks on Ukraine failed to secure a breakthrough ending hours after Kiev ordered its army to withdraw from a key eastern airport after coming under a ferocious assault from separatists fighters reportedly backed by a Russian army tank column.

The setback in the east came amid accusations from Kiev that Russian units were directly leading the assault and triggered a warning from Ukraine’s defence minister that a “great war” had broken out with Russia .

Valeriy Geletey said the conflict over Ukraine, “the likes of which Europe has not seen since the Second World War,” would could cost tens of thousands of lives.

The loss of the airport at Luhansk, where the Ukraine military has held a strong separatist presence at bay for months, is a deep wound for Kiev loyalists who had been beating back the separatists until the most recent Russian intervention.

“In the Lugansk direction, Ukrainian forces received an order and pulled back from the airport,” Ukraine army spokesman Andriy Lysenko said.

Footage broadcast on Russian state television showed tanks firing as combat raged around the airport building, which appeared to have been heavily damaged during weeks of fighting.

“Lugansk. We are retreating. Long convoys of tanks, APCs and lorries full of run-down and exhausted soldiers are going past. Black from soot and dusty faces. Dried blood on their bullet-proof vests. The men have endured a battle with a battalion of new Russian T-90 tanks,” Yuri Kasyanov, a Ukrainian activist delivering supplies to the frontline wrote on Facebook.

The significant reverse for the Ukrainian military is the latest in a series of defeats at the hands of Russian-backed separatists in the east of the country in a conflict that the UN says has claimed 2,593 people killed since mid-April, not including 298 passengers and crew of Malaysian Airlines MH17. Human Rights Watch said more than 300 civilians had been killed in Luhansk and the surrounding area in the upsurge in fighting.

Petro Poroshenko, Ukraine’s president described the clashes as the latest step in Moscow’s “direct and open aggression”.

On a visit to Russia’s Far East where he opened a new gas pipeline system to China, Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, retorted accused the Ukrainian army of firing indiscriminately in civilian areas.

“[Separatists have] been provoked by regular Ukrainian forces that encircle large towns and shoot point blank at residential areas this is what, unfortunately, in a lot of countries, including Europe, they prefer not to notice,” Mr Putin said.

Russia and its separatist ally participated in talks with a representive from Kiev but the meeting was adjourned without any recommendations until Friday.

However the Russian leader said the meeting in Minsk was “the beginning of a very important process” in which Ukraine was prepared for the first time to discuss the separatist demands.

Andrei Purgin, the separatist representative at the talks, did not demand independence but government autonomy and freedom to use Russian as the official language.

The rebels platform appeared to reflect Putin’s desire to see off more Western sanctions while preserving the gains the separatists have made inside.

The European Union leaders has set a week deadline for the imposition of a new round of sanctions to punish Russia for sending tanks and troops into southeastern Ukraine.

The Nato summit in Wales on Thursday is also expected to approve measures designed to counter Russia’s aggressive actions in Ukraine.

Despite Ukraine’s assertions to the contrary and mounting evidence on the ground of the presence of Russian troops, the Kremlin has repeatedly denied that its military is operating inside Ukraine.

But Mr Geletey, the Kiev defence minister said, the reinforcements rescued the separatists from a crushing defeat.

The fortunes of separatist fighters, who were trapped in small areas around the cities of Lugansk and Donestsk, have been dramatically reversed over the last week and they have pushed back troops loyal to Kiev and successfully opened a new front on the north coast of the Black Sea.

“Our military confidently pinned back the bands of Russian mercenaries, destroyed saboteurs and special forces. Precisely because of this the Kremlin was forced to turn to a full-scale invasion with regular troops of the Donbass [an informal name for the Lugansk and Donetsk regions]. Today we are dealing with divisions and regiments. Tomorrow it could be whole corps,” he said.

A group of Russian relatives of servicemen undercut the Kremlin’s protestations by claiming that 15,000 Russian soldiers have been sent to Ukraine over the past two months, and at least 200 may have died in combat there.

Valentina Melnikova, head of the Committee of Soldiers’ Mothers, the main organisation representing the families of servicemen, said some 7,000 to 8,000 Russian troops are believed to be in Ukraine at present.

Citing her own estimates, she believes that between 10,000 and 15,000 troops have been deployed to Ukraine over the past two months.

“Unfortunately, I am convinced I am right,” she said, revealing calculations based on information from families whose husbands and sons have been sent on drills close to the border, but then have gone incommunicado. “Military commanders are conducting a secret special operation.”

Developments in Luhansk and more fighting in the key city of Donetsk caused a run on the rouble on Monday that saw the currency fall to a record low But Kiev too was forced to introduce new foreign exchange restrictions to shore up its currency.

Ukraine’s army appears to be in retreat across the south and east in the region has visibly decreased in recent days.

“The town is being erased off the face of the earth,” said Yelena Proidak, a resident of Petrovske, a town between Donetsk and Lugansk. “There is no normal life here.”

A senior Ukrainian security official said Russia appeared determined to “create a land corridor to Crimea,” its annexed territory on the Black Sea.