Romanian Liberal Party leader and ethnic German mayor Klaus Johannis erased a 10-percentage point deficit to unexpectedly beat Prime Minister Victor Ponta in the Black Sea nation’s second-round presidential election.

Ponta conceded defeat in a televised speech from Bucharest in which he congratulated Johannis even as exit polls showed the race too close to call. He lost his lead from two weeks ago, when he won the election’s first round with 40.4% of the votes compared with 30.4% for Johannis. Ponta said he wouldn’t resign from the prime minister’s post.

The Electoral Bureau will release the vote’s first partial results at 2 a.m. tomorrow. Turnout was about 62 percent when polls closed at 9 p.m. in Bucharest, Electoral Bureau data showed.

“The results are a big surprise compared to the first round, but not so big compared to previous elections,” Cristian Ghinea, head of the Romanian Center of European Policies, said today by phone. “Ponta was defeated because he lost a big lead in two weeks after annoying the urban electorate by failing to organize the voting abroad and showing too much confidence in his victory.”

The final result was influenced by the votes cast by Romanians living abroad. About 290,000 voted abroad by 7 p.m., more than double than in the Nov. 2 first round.

Several thousand people took to the streets in Bucharest and other cities to protest long lines at voting centers abroad. People in Bucharest were asking for Ponta’s resignation as television images showed thousands of Romanians lining up for hours to vote in London, Paris, Munich and other cities in Europe. Police fired tear gas in Turin to disperse Romanians angry that they weren’t able to vote before polls closed, according to Realitatea TV.

“I thank my supporters from all my heart, and I’m sorry that we didn’t succeed,” Ponta said in a telephone interview with Antena 3 television. “Categorically, the government coalition remains together.”

With economic growth exceeding estimates and a target to adopt the euro in 2019, Romanians voted to replace outgoing president Traian Basescu, who couldn’t run for re-election after serving two five-year terms. With Basescu at the helm, the country witnessed growth rates higher than China in 2008 and some of the toughest austerity measures in the European Union two years later in the financial crisis.

The leu gained 0.1 percent to 4.4265 per euro in Bucharest on Nov. 14, while the yields on the government’s euro-denominated bond due in 2024 fell 1 basis point, or 0.01 percentage point, to 2.76 percent, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.

“Johannis will likely use the presidency’s influence over the majority in parliament to undermine Ponta’s government,” Tsveta Petrova, an analyst at New York-based Eurasia Group, said in an e-mailed note before the vote. “Johannis has a strong chance of unseating Ponta and instituting a government that is more business-friendly than the current governing coalition, though not necessarily able to change the course in the medium term.”

After an election campaign that was clouded by corruption scandals and accusations by Basescu that Ponta was a spy before entering politics, which he denied, Ponta boosted his popularity by stepping up spending and promising higher pensions and salaries. Johannis pledged to crack down on corruption and strengthen the rule of law. Romania is due to hold parliamentary elections in 2016.

“I’m waiting for a miracle, not just a change,” said Sandu Constantin, a 42-year-old public servant, after casting his vote in Bucharest. “We don’t have a strong industrial sector, we can’t make money in agriculture or tourism, the health care system is in ruins, education changes from election to election. We live on hope, nothing else.”