Romanians are voting in an election that’s set to propel Prime Minister Victor Ponta toward the presidency after he batted away corruption investigations of members of his party and allegations he’s a former spy.

Polling stations opened at 7 a.m. in Bucharest and close at 9 p.m. Social Democrat Ponta, 42, had a lead of as much as 13 percentage points over Liberal Party leader Klaus Johannis heading into the first leg of the presidential ballot, polls showed. That would set up a runoff between the two on Nov. 16, which Ponta would win, according to the surveys. Turnout at 4 p.m local time was about 33 percent, the Electoral Bureau said.

“I voted for Ponta because he’s young and I hope he can work for a better future for my family with more jobs,” Constantin Mihailescu, 60, a retired engineer, said after casting his vote in the capital.

The campaign has been overshadowed by raids on the homes of senior Social Democrats over graft and accusations by outgoing President Traian Basescu that Ponta served in the intelligence service before entering politics. The premier says the probes won’t be stopped and denies Basescu’s claims. To voters, Ponta’s vows to boost living standards and pensions trump the scandals, according to the Institute for Public Policies in Bucharest.

‘Silver-Bullet Mentality’

“The opposition are locked in a so-called silver-bullet mentality, waiting for a decisive blow to come out of the sky and demolish Ponta,” said Adrian Moraru, an analyst at the institute, which has been studying Romanian elections since 2004. “The problem is that none of his rivals seem to have the capacity to deliver that blow.”

Ponta is poised to get 43 percent of the vote to Johannis’s 30 percent, an Oct. 23 survey of 1,124 people by the IRES polling company showed. Other candidates include Basescu-backed Elena Udrea and ex-Premier Calin Popescu Tariceanu, who have 8 percent and 6 percent support, according to the poll, which had a margin of error of 3 percentage points.

An Oct. 2-8 survey of 1,058 people by INSCOP showed a 10-point advantage for Ponta over Johannis. He comes out on top in the second round in both polls.

Ponta’s lead has endured even as his allies came under the spotlight of a graft probe into former officials involved in buying $105 million of Microsoft Office licenses for schools.

Prosecutors ‘Panicking’

Police detained Udrea’s ex-husband and another businessman on Oct. 29 and the immunity of opposition lawmaker Valerian Vreme was revoked. While the premier pledged nothing could block the investigation, the Ponta-controlled parliament postponed a decision on lifting Social Democratic senator Ecaterina Androescu’s immunity until after the ballot.

All the officials and Microsoft deny wrongdoing.

While Ponta’s rating has held up, the case -- part of a flurry of probes in the runup to the election -- may reveal concern in the judiciary that the premier will ease up on graft. The issue is key for Romania, whose courts are under review by the European Commission, preventing the nation from joining the Schengen visa-free zone and deterring investment.

“Anti-corruption prosecutors are panicking a bit that they won’t have the same degree of freedom after the elections,” Cristian Ghinea, head of the Romanian Center of European Policies, said by phone. “The ruling coalition has left this ambiguity hanging.”

Populist Measures

Ponta, who as president would have the right to name judges, has also fought off the spy claim from Basescu, an adversary he’s often squared off against in the past. Ponta called the allegation a lie, saying he’s “always served his country and abided by the law.”

It may not be all plain sailing for the premier, according to Otilia Dhand, an analyst at Teneo Intelligence. There’s a “strong possibility” the corruption scandals could change electoral preferences, she said by e-mail from London.

Ponta’s popularity stems from initiatives such as promises to raise pensions and boost salaries. He can also point to an economic track record whose highlight is the 5.9 percent annual jump in gross domestic product in the fourth quarter of 2013, the fastest pace since 2008.

“Strong growth, falling unemployment, and falling inflation all work in Ponta’s favor,” Tsveta Petrova, an analyst at New York-based Eurasia Group, said Oct. 30 in an e-mailed note. “Ponta’s government has also recently implemented a number of populist measures, including allocating additional funds to local governments to mobilize local party machines.”

Asset Sales

After Romania posted a budget surplus of 0.1 percent of GDP in the first nine months, Ponta urged his ministers this week to speed expenditure.

The prime minister, who’s bolstered government coffers by selling off stakes in energy companies Electrica SA and Romgaz SA, has delayed a review of the country’s third standby program with the International Monetary Fund and the European Union until after the elections. The lenders are seeking proof a payroll-tax cut is sustainable for the budget.

Romania’s currency has rallied during Ponta’s stint as premier. The leu has strengthened 2.7 percent since his coalition won parliamentary elections on Dec. 6, 2012, data compiled by Bloomberg show. That compares with a 2.1 percent drop for the Polish zloty, an 8.2 percent plunge for the Hungarian forint and a 9.3 percent decline for the Czech koruna.

The currency strengthened 0.2 percent to 4.4105 per euro on Oct. 31, while the yield on the government’s euro-denominated bond due in October 2024 was little changed at 2.9 percent.

A Ponta victory would guarantee “a degree of continuity in policy making,” according to Pasquale Diana, an economist at Morgan Stanley in London. Romanian assets would probably benefit if he was elected and named a premier he can easily cooperate with, Diana said in an Oct. 28 e-mailed note.

“Such an arrangement would constitute a great deal of concentration of power in the hands of Ponta and his party, though it would probably be the least disruptive for markets in the near term,” he said.