Folow us Modifică dimensiunea fontului: Play

Bucharest, Sep 20 /Agerpres/ - Prime Minister Victor Ponta launched on Saturday, the very day he turns 42, his candidacy to the Romanian Presidency, in an event staged at the National Arena in Bucharest, attended by tens of thousands of people.



The event started with the song "We feel the same," interpreted by Lidia Buble and Adrian Sana. Social Democratic Party's (PSD) President Victor Ponta and his wife, MEP Daciana Sarbu, made their entry into the National Arena accompanied by Iurie leanca, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Moldova, Deputy Prime Minister Daniel Constantin, President of the Conservative Party, Deputy Prime Minister Gabriel Oprea, President of the National Union for Romania's Progress. Also on the stage were PSD's leaders Ecaterina Andronescu, Titus Corlatean, Rovana Plumb, Valeriu Zgonea, Lia Olguta Vasilescu, Dan Sova, Gabriela Firea, Corina Cretu, Gabriela Szabo, Mihai Sturzu.



Deputy Prime Minister Liviu Dragnea was the first to deliver a speech from the huge stage situated in the center of the arena. He expressed his confidence in Ponta's chances of becoming president of Romania, and he pointed out that this time those chances will be playing at home, and not away, like the 2012 referendum.



"I came here to say that we love our country so very much and to give a president that's worthy of it and I hope that on the night of November 16, after counting all the votes, we can say those three words: Victor Ponta - President. We are on the National Team Arena, Arena Romania, where Romanians have always played at home, where we start the campaign, and this time we play at home, not away, like we played in the referendum, we play here. Victor Ponta will win the vote, and not at the green table. Now comes the revenge of 7.4 million of Romanians," said Dragnea.



Afterwards followed the video messages of support to Victor Ponta on presidential race transmitted by the European Parliament's President Martin Schulz, Vice-chancellor of Germany, Sigmar Gabriel, chairman of S&D Group in the European Parliament, Gianni Pittella, and the Prime Ministers of Belgium, Serbia, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Georgia, Albania.



Also, a message of support to Ponta's candidacy in the presidential elections came from the Prime Minister of the Republic of Moldova, Iurie Leanca. ''In the name of the Republic of Moldova I welcome and support the candidacy of Victor Ponta in the presidential election and I am convinced that the first foreign destination for Victor Ponta as president of Romania will be in Chisinau," said Leancă.



Among those who have sent video messages of support for Victor Ponta were also included PSD leaders and ministers, actors Radu Beligan and Marius Bodochi, former goalkeeper Helmuth Duckadam.



Attending the event, the Mayor of Bucharest, Sorin Oprescu, said that Romania needs a "different" president, expressing his belief that Victor Ponta is "the man who must" for this function. "Romania needs a different president, who loves the country and the people, a president with balance and wisdom, common sense, educated and understanding the needs of his fellow. (...) I for one have the certain faith, without doubt, that Victor Ponta is the man we need, and that the country needs," said Oprescu. He told Ponta that when he will reach the country's leadership he must not forget to be on the side of the people. "Do not forget when you get to lead this country, when you take the oath, (...) be your guide - to be always on the side of the ruled ones," said Oprescu.



After that moment, Prime Minister Victor Ponta climbed on the stage, and he called on Romanian to be with him in which will mean a great union, stating that there are 55 days before it can become reality.



"Please all Romanians think to this - we can together make a change in our country. (...) You see that the sun comes out on our street. You see the sun comes out in our country. We still have very little, we have 55 days and another battle to win, and I call you all to start on the road to change, I call you all to be together on the way to the great unity of all Romanians "said the Premier.



Ponta claimed that he wants to be a president of all Romanians, of all those who want a real change, of those who like him or not. "Dear colleagues, Victor Viorel Ponta want to be the president of Romanians, of those Romanians who are together, who believe, who are proud and have hope that they will change the country for the better. That president I want to be and I call you to be together with me in this battle towards the great union," - that was the message of the PSD's President.



Victor Ponta said he is proud of his family. "Like many of you, I am the grandson of a Romanian who in 1917 asked the Romanian nationality and fought alongside Romanians for the Great Union. I'm The grandson of a priest who taught me the importance of believing in one God, the Orthodox, Catholics, Muslims (...), but one who believes in God is a man who thinks carefully to others. I'm the child of parents like you have, who invested everything they had into me and my sisters, and I am a father who want to see my children growing in Romania, a proud and strong country," said the presidential candidate.



The event ended on the song "There is my country" by Tudor Gheorghe, those present witnessing a show created by confetti colors red and white and tricolor.



Most of the participants at the event were dressed in red shirts and carried banners, national flags or flags with election messages. Other delegates were dressed in national costumes of the regions they represent. AGERPRES