Tina Brennen pictured at the Summerland site in 2013 with her petition to create a memorial Garden for the victims of the 1973 fire

A Summerland campaigner says she is in shock about the chilling similarities between the 1973 fire and the blaze at Grenfell Tower.

Tina Brennen was 19 at the time of Summerland disaster and vividly remembers watching the complex go up in flames from Port Jack, while holding her five-month-old daughter.

She is continuing her campaign for a memorial to be created at the Summerland site, dedicated to the 50 men, women and children who died there.

Meanwhile, the number of people dead or missing presumed dead after the Grenfell Tower fire has risen to 79, police confirmed this week.

Tina said: ’I’m in shock about the chilling similarities between these two horrific fires - the speed of the fire; combustible materials used; inefficient alarms; means of escape blocked; inadequate fire regulations and building controls.

’There are questions which must be answered by those responsible. Will they be held accountable or will the inquiry report exonerate them stating ’there are no villains here’ as our elected representatives here on the Isle of Man were exonerated 44 years ago?

’No one answered for the 50 deaths in the Summerland fire. Back then UK newspaper headlines read ’How Could You Let This Happen?’. We thought lessons had been learned but once again innocent people have paid the price. Our thoughts are with them, their families and friends. I know they will never be forgotten.’

In the days following last Wednesday’s tragedy at Grenfell Tower block in the London borough of Kensington and Chelsea, attention has focused on the panels that were fitted to the outside of the tower during a refurbishment in 2011. The panels have been labelled flammable by German and US authorities and banned from use on high rise buildings.

It emerged that the panels used were the cheaper flammable version, that cost £22 each, compared to the ’fire-resistant’ version which cost £24 each.

There are also concerns that the addition of the panels to the outside of the building created a chimney effect, sending flames up the outside of the building, spreading the fire faster.

Summerland was clad in a transparent acrylic sheeting called Oroglas which when ignited became molten and the burning panels dripped on to those trying to escape.

The aftermath of Summerland led to the tightening up of fire regulations in public buildings across the island and the UK.

Tina will once again be holding a one minute’s silence for the victims and all those affected by the Summerland fire on the 44th anniversary, August 2.

This will take place on the Douglas promenades walkway opposite the Summerland site at 7pm, and will feature Ellan Vannin Pipes and Drums.

A Summerland memorial concert will also be held, on Saturday July 29, at Peel Centenary Centre, to raise funds for Alder Hey Children’s Burns Unit.

Tickets price £10 are available from the venue’s website, Peter Norris Music, Thompson Travel, Celtic Gold and Shakti Man.

Tina says she is continuing her efforts to have the site taken off the market and a memorial placed there.

She had a meeting with MHKs Ray Harmer, Clare Bettison and Tim Baker in March and is awaiting a decision on the future of the site.

Share this story