Jody Martin acted quickly as he realised residents were “screaming for help” and he entered the West London tower block. He told the BBC: “I grabbed an axe from the fire truck, it looked like there was a bit of confusion about what to do.

TWITTER Two hundred firefighters were called to control the blaze

“I ran around the building looking for a fire escape and couldn't see any noticeable fire escapes around the building. A lot of debris falling down. “I eventually gained entry onto the second floor, and once I got to the corridor I realised there was so much smoke there.” The fire at Grenfell Tower on the Lancaster West Estate was reported at 12.54am BST and about 200 firefighters are still tackling the blaze.

London fire: Terrifying images from the tragedy Thu, June 15, 2017 Seventeen people have died and more are feared dead after a huge fire destroyed the tower block in north Kensington Play slideshow PA 1 of 86 Smoke billows from a fire that has engulfed the 27-storey Grenfell Tower in west London

Mr Martin added that given the thickness of the smoke, he would be surprised if anyone could have left the building without assistance. The attempted rescuer continued: “I watched one person falling out, I watched another woman holding her baby out the window… hearing screams, I was yelling everyone to get down and they were saying, 'We can't leave our apartments, the smoke is too bad on the corridors’.” Police arrived with battering rams and were working in unison with fire crews to try free those who were trapped.

TWITTER Police have closed off roads in the area

The cause of the fire is currently unknown, but there have been claims an exploding fridge may have initiated it. Officers reported that the A40 has been closed in both directions between Marylebone and Northern Roundabout as fire teams scramble to tackle the fire. An action group for Grenfell Tower warned the building was a fire risk more than a year ago.

TWITTER Reports have claimed the blaze was started by an exploding fridge

In a blog post written in January 2016, the group said there were issues involving an accumulation of rubbish and a lack of fire exits in the building. The post reads: “It has been very clear for some time to the residents of Grenfell Tower that those responsible for ensuring the smooth running of Lancaster West Estate are failing in their duty of care and wilfully allowing our residential amenity to decline in unacceptable ways.

TWITTER Residents were reported to be screaming from the apartment block