Shadow chancellor says he stands by comments that victims of fire were murdered by political decisions

John McDonnell has said people responsible for “social murder” at Grenfell Tower should be held to account.

The shadow chancellor insisted he had no regrets about saying the victims of the disaster in west London were murdered by political decisions taken over recent decades.

He reiterated the claim and defended his previous remarks in an appearance on BBC1’s The Andrew Marr Show.

At least 80 people are thought to have died in last month’s devastating fire at Grenfell Tower.

McDonnell, asked if he regretted saying people were murdered by political decisions, replied: “No, I don’t regret that. I was extremely angry with what went on. I’m a west London MP, this site is not far from me.

“Political decisions were made which resulted in the deaths of these people. That’s a scandal.”

Living in the shadow of Grenfell: 'It’s like looking into an open coffin' Read more

Pressed on the use of the word murder, McDonnell replied: “There’s a long history in this country of the concept of social murder where decisions are made with no regard to consequences of that, and as a result of that people have suffered.

“That’s what’s happened here, and I’m angry.”

He added: “I believe social murder has occurred in this incidence and I believe people should be accountable.”

McDonnell, asked to explain who the murderers were, said: “I think there’s been a consequence of political decisions over years that have not addressed the housing crisis that we’ve had, that have cut back on local government so proper inspections have not been made, 11,000 firefighter jobs have been cut as well – even the investment in aerial ladders, and things like that in our country.”

Marr asked if the Labour MP was suggesting the politicians who sanctioned the cuts were murderers.

McDonnell replied: “I believe politicians have to be held to account. I remain angry at how many people have lost their lives as a result of political decisions made over years.”

He added: “I do not resile from what I’ve said and I remain angry at the loss of life that has taken place not far away from my constituency.”

McDonnell made his original comments – that people at Grenfell Tower were “murdered by political decisions that were taken over recent decades” – during a debate at Glastonbury festival’s Left Field tent, which asked whether democracy was broken.