Share this article with Google Plus

Firemen battle a huge tower block fire in west London, Britain, 14 June 2017 (Picture: EPA)

Tales of kindness are emerging from the horrific Grenfell Tower fire.

People are rushing to help residents affected by the horrendous blaze that engulfed a north Kensington block of flats.

Fire service confirm there have been ‘a number of fatalities’ in Grenfell Tower fire

Several hundred people were thought to be inside the 27-storey building when it went up in flames in the early hours of this morning.

As brave emergency services battle to save the casualties, we are starting to hear touching stories of the kindness of strangers.

Michael, a resident who lives on the seventh storey of the Latimer Road block, describes how he stopped to save a young girl on his way out of the burning building.

Sorry, this video is no longer available.

While other Londoners are offering shelter for the families who managed to escape from the fire in their home, only to find they have nowhere to go.

If anyone suffering from the #LatimerRoad Tower needs any shelter or food i have a 3 bedroom flat in Notting Hill Gate with lots of food ❤️ — +44 🇵🇹 (@filipeluisrl) June 14, 2017

A man donates water to a stall which has been set up to help people near the burning 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London on June 14, 2017 in London Picture: Getty)

And people nearby are rushing to the scene with water and clothes to help the survivors – many of whom have been left with only the clothes on their back.

Sky reporting a woman turned up to one community centre nearby with a bin bag full of toys to hand out to evacuated children. — Dawn Foster (@DawnHFoster) June 14, 2017

Phone network provider EE have announced they will allow people caught up in the incident to use their phones or devices to contact friends and family.

The most local stores are on Kensington High Street, Notting Hill, Queensway, and there are two in White City. — EE (@EE) June 14, 2017

A Suffa Global team from east London arrived with supplies for those who were evacuated from the area.

Guys from east london turned up with food, water and sanitary items for those evacuated from the tower block #grenfellfire pic.twitter.com/jGp6cO23Zm — AssedBaig (@AssedBaig) June 14, 2017

Local Mosques and churches in the area have been opening their doors to those caught up in the fire.

Local Mosque in #latimerroad area open doors for help. Really appreciated by locals. #GrenfellTower #LondonFire — Syed Ajmal Kazmi (@SyedAjmalKazmi) June 14, 2017

St Clements Church in Treadgold St has been turned into evacuation, support centre @newscomauHQ #GrenfellTowerFire pic.twitter.com/eJS59o0nA7 — Victoria Craw (@victoria_craw) June 14, 2017

What we know about the Grenfell Tower fire London Fire Brigade was first called at 12.54am on Wednesday morning to the Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road.

At least 17 deaths have been confirmed following the blaze at Grenfell Tower in north Kensington.

At least 74 people have been taken to five hospitals, London Ambulance Service said.

Around 20 people are in critical care.

The building in north Kensington is at least 24 stories high.

Forty engines containing more than 200 firefighters attended the scene.

Thirty people were taken to five hospitals following the fire.

Fire crews from north Kensington, Kensington, Hammersmith and Paddington and surrounding stations were at the scene with the fire burning from the second to the top floor.

The cause of the fire is not yet clear.

London mayor Sadiq Khan has said the fire has been declared a 'major incident'.

The Grenfell Tower was built in 1974 and contains 120 homes, according to the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.

More than 20 ambulance crews were sent to the scene, London Ambulance Service said.

The Metropolitan Police have set up a casualty bureau for anyone concerned about their friends and family on 0800 0961 233.

And even Cath Kidston offered people a temporary shelter.

To our neighbours and our community of Latimer Road. You're all in our thoughts and our hearts, offering shelter @ Freston Rd #GrenfellTower pic.twitter.com/M35ke5u0aM — Cath Kidston (@Cath_Kidston) June 14, 2017

The chairman of Queens Park Rangers said he was enquiring as to whether their Shepherd’s Bush stadium, Loftus Road, could also be used as a centre.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Tony Fernandes tweeted: ‘Our community team will be mobilised. We will do whatever.’

Facebook activate Safety Check as dozens feared dead in Grenfell Tower fire

The British Red Cross said its volunteers were also at the scene, with volunteers providing practical help and emotional support at a rest centre.

Meanwhile, a number of individuals have reached out via Facebook, Twitter and Instagram to offer accommodation and transport help to those affected.

One woman, named Giselle, tweeted: “Just called [Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea] @RBKC and left my details.

‘They are looking for emergency housing. I have offered my place. Do the same if you can #Grenfell.’

Here’s how to help those affected in the Grenfell Tower fire.

Update: The local council has since encouraged any more people affected by the fire to go to the Westway Sports Centre in Crowthorne Road, as many others are ‘reaching capacity’.

MORE: Dozens feared dead in huge tower block fire in West London