05:20

People deliver supplies to St Clements Church. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian

The bishop of Kensington, Graham Tomlin, spent much of yesterday providing pastoral support to emergency crews in the shadow of the tower.

He praised the “extraordinary professionalism” of the “brilliant, amazing people” from the crews he met, but added: “They were also conscious that some of the things they saw and had to deal with were pretty distressing.”

He continued: “At the time, you switch off, but they are also aware that in the coming days some of those sights will come back to them.”

He also met specialists with the grim task of identifying bodies. “There’s a team of people nationally. They did the Manchester attacks, the London Bridge attacks, and now this. One of them was saying this was three one-in-a-lifetime events in one month.”

Tomlin was on his way to St Clements, where many took refuge in the disaster’s immediate aftermath and where clergy worked until past midnight ensuring everyone had a place to stay.

Many were put up by family and friends nearby, while others went to the Westway sports centre. He expected some families would be returning to St Clements today.

“The likelihood is that the death toll is going to rise, and a lot of families will get bad news,” he said. “Today is about providing support and pastoral care for them.” He added: “The church is here. We will be here long after the media circus is gone. The church in this area will be working quite hard to provide support to people who have lost everything.”

Tomlin added he would also be “monitoring quite carefully the debate about what went on here, what led to the fire” as well as housing issues in north Kensington.

“There are clearly real questions to be asked,” he said. “Apportioning blame at this point doesn’t really help anyone, but as time goes on we will be quite interested in those issues and trying to make sure measures are put in place to protect people.”

He said it was vital to ensure “people at the bottom of the ladder don’t get put in danger, the way it’s possible they may have done here”.