Anger at residents’ ignored concerns before the fire has now mingled with confusion at the many unanswered questions in the wake of the tragedy

By 4am on Wednesday, three hours after the fire started, Grenfell Tower was a hellish sight: flames poured from all sides of the 24-storey tower block under billowing smoke and charred debris fell from the upper storeys.

On the streets and estates below the tower, the entire neighbourhood seemed to be out, many in their pyjamas and dressing gowns, mesmerised by the horror and trying to shout to people still visible in the windows.

It was immediately clear that something had gone terribly, unforgivably wrong. People described how rapidly the flames ripped through the building. Several said the newly installed cladding had caught fire and showed reporters photos and videos appearing to show the fire shooting straight up the outside of the building, then encircling it.

Grenfell Tower fire: Prime minister announces £5m aid package – latest Read more

In the hours and days that followed, anger that such a tragedy could have happened mingled with chaos on the streets of north Kensington, as a close-knit community attempted to compensate for an apparent vacuum of official information or support.

The tower was an “accident waiting to happen”, said a man that night who asked not to be named, wearing everything he now owned and wrapped in a blanket. “For years they’ve abused our community.”

Firefighters and the emergency services worked tirelessly to save lives but from the start there was a striking absence of official coordination on the ground. Local churches and community centres threw open their doors. By 6am, five hours after the fire took hold, at least three centres were taking people in, but news spread by word of mouth rather than through official channels.

At the Rugby Portobello Trust on Walmer Road, knots of dazed people filled the street. Some had escaped from the tower with only the clothes they stood in, while others frantically searched for family and friends. They described speaking to relatives who had been told to stay in their flats, and who were no longer answering their phones.

Amid the shock and desperation, there was immediate anger: anger that the residents’ fears had been ignored, and that even at 6am it appeared there were no officials present, nobody from the council or the landlord – the Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO).

“Investigate the TMO,” the man in a blanket yelled. “They are guilty of murder.” He had been awoken by his neighbour’s shouts, he said. Nobody said they had heard a fire alarm or seen fire sprinklers; Siar Naqshabandi said he seen the flames and called his brother, who was on the tower’s third floor and was totally unaware of the blaze. His uncle and family were on the 23rd floor, he added. “I told them to get down,” he said. “They said we’re not allowed to get out.”

Nobody appeared to be gathering the names of the survivors or missing at the centre until after 9am, eight hours after the fire started. Some questioned whether a building housing rich people would have caught fire so quickly or burned for so long. The contrast to the aftermath of the Manchester terrorist attack, where a well-resourced centre for relatives of the missing and dead was rapidly operational, was striking.

'We want justice': Grenfell Tower protest spills into town hall Read more

Ahmed Chellat, whose brother-in-law, wife and three children had not been heard from for hours, said: “The whole issue here is for five hours we’ve been here with my sister in law and some tenants. There’s no councillors, no TMO to say exactly what’s going on. If it wasn’t for the local people we would be in the street. This is ridiculous. There’s no one to tell them what to do.”

It was the same story at the other makeshift rescue centres that sprang up around the tower. Donations – pallets of water bottles and blankets in the early hours, then clothes, toys, and food – flowed in, but the lack of coordination meant there was near-chaos. “We’re coordinating with the other centres to try and find out what they need but there’s no one on the ground from a professional emergency response level,” said Tim Burke, a local arts organiser, speaking outside the Latymer Christian Centre.

Another charity, the Westway Trust, opened the doors to its gym underneath the A40 flyover, with 300 beds from donors in place by mid-afternoon and ready to take families in. The charity’s trustees had opened on their own initiative, but were liaising with the council by late morning.

The only signs of Kensington and Chelsea borough council were the people manning the gym’s doors on Thursday morning, and the news from the press office that the council had accommodated those made homeless in hotels around the area.

By Thursday morning, north Kensington was upside down. There was a smell of burnt plastic that ebbed and flowed as the wind shifted, and the sight of the tower’s carcass was a brutal shock every time it could be glimpsed through the gaps in surrounding buildings.

There was huge generosity, community spirit and eagerness to help. People were still reeling, some weeping or shouting as they recounted to one another what they had seen.

By the Latymer Christian Centre on Bramley Road, some volunteers worked through the night at an impromptu donation centre, trying to organise the mountains of donated goods and appealing for more volunteers and warehouse space. A couple of hours later, centres were having to turn away volunteers. The close-knit community, used to collective action partly through years of organising the Notting Hill carnival, sprang into action while other people travelled from further afield.

But there was no visible marshalling of the enormous ad hoc rescue operation that had sprung up on the ground; no information on whether the acrid smoke or the clumps of ash that fell everywhere might be toxic; no tally of how many people were believed missing for those who gathered everywhere on the streets.

There was anger among the grief and solidarity, evidenced by some messages on the tribute wall that was erected next to Latymer Christian Centre. “I was watching the fire spread & engulf all the building from 1am. Your memories will be forever with me. RIP. Go to hell all those responsible,” said one. “Babies thrown from buildings (why) in 2017,” read another. “Justice for Grenfell. Jail those responsible,” read a third.



It was a hot day and the streets heaved with volunteers, onlookers, reporters and TV cameras. Tables offering food were set up in the road and the pavements outside some of the reception centres were crowded with yet more piles of donations. Volunteers were loading goods into vans but it wasn’t clear where they were going.

At times, tempers frayed. Under the Westway, a man confronted Channel 4 News’s John Snow about the media’s lack of interest in the residents’ fears before the disaster happened, and a crowd quickly gathered. “You should have come here before,” he shouted, unfurling a sign that read: “This is not a photo opportunity.” People lashed out at photographers and cameramen. Many reporters on the ground noted the absence of any commanding presence – whether the council, the capital’s mayoralty or the government.

Amid the outpouring of community feeling there was a volatile sense of grievance in a neighbourhood that felt overlooked and neglected, whose worst fears had suddenly attracted the world’s attention, and where in the immediate aftermath of disaster the authorities were nowhere to be seen.