79 died in the tragedy (Picture: Rick Findler/PA Wire)

NHS Trusts are being urged to check hospitals for flammable cladding, after police confirmed materials used on Grenfell Tower failed all safety tests.

Regulator NHS Improvement has written to around 200 Trusts in England, asking them to check their buildings for materials implicated in the tragedy, according to Sky News.

Man moves into his dream home and finds 'more than 150 problems' on day one

Trusts have been told to report back within 24 hours and to pay particular attention too tall buildings on hospital estates and those with in-patients.

Fourteen high rise blocks across nine local authorities have been identified as having potentially combustible cladding.

And around 600 tower blocks identified as being clad in plastic materials are currently being tested.

Trusts have been told to pay attention to buildings with in-patients (Picture: Reuters)

Those found to have flammable cladding or insulation may have to be evacuated and the material removed.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Premier Inn confirmed they had concerns over cladding used on three of their hotels, but stressed that it was not the same material as that used on Grenfell Tower.

Siblings report own parents to police after being 'made to watch Isis beheading video'

Earlier this month, 79 people died when a blaze tore through the building.

The letter from NHS Improvement asked Trusts to detail what type of cladding is used on all buildings on their estates, including those built under Private Finance Initiative (PFI) deals; which contractors carried out the work; how many storeys buildings have; whether in-patients are present; and if any risk assessment has been carried out in the last year.

An extract of the letter from Simon Corden, published by Health Service Journal, read: ‘We do need to take all reasonable precautionary measures and be ready to rapidly implement any recommendations that come from the findings of the ongoing investigations.’

Police confirmed insulation and cladding failed all safety tests (Picture: Jack Taylor/Getty Images)

Metro.co.uk have contacted NHS England for a comment.

MORE: Man named as potential new suspect in JonBenét murder investigation

MORE: Grenfell Tower charity single reaches number 1 just 48 hours after release