To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Protesters trying to storm the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea headquarters have turned into a scuffle.

There were reports that they attacked council staff leaving the building under police escort.

Angry crowds shout ‘coward’ and ‘murderer’ at Theresa May as she leaves Grenfell Tower relief centre

Hundreds of people, gathered outside the town hall, said they wanted answers over the Grenfell Tower disaster.

Footage from Sky News showed the crowds descending on people leaving the building and there has been at least one arrest. A TV cameraman was also chased down the street.

It is believed they were being escorted out by police at the time and they appeared to have to return to the building to take refuge.

The crowd appears to be split as to what they want. Many are expressing anger and trying to storm the building, while many others are telling them to stay calm.

A council worker is targeted by protesters outside Kensington and Chelsea council offices (Picture: Sky News)

Scuffles broke out outside the council offices (Picture: Reuters)

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Scores of protesters later surged towards the building’s entrance, apparently trying to get in.

Advertisement

Advertisement

But they were soon called back away from the foyer by one of the organisers, who urged them to remain calm.

A council spokesman initially declined to comment on the action.

A number of people could later be seen inside the building being confronted by police and security guards in high visibility vests on a stairwell.

Protesters began covering their faces as the atmosphere appeared to get increasingly ugly.

At one point some of the crowd chased a television cameraman down the street. Police officers lined the door to the hall with some protesters still inside.

There were calls of ‘murderers’ and ‘we want justice now’.

Among the demands of some protesters was the rehousing within the borough of all those who lost their home and more information on the victims.

Police pushed protesters out of the council building (Picture: PA)

They stormed the offices in Kensington this afternoon (Picture: Reuters)

Increasing numbers of police have arrived at the scene this afternoon (Picture: PA)

Councils across the country have ordered urgent reviews of their social housing stock in the wake of the Grenfell Tower disaster.

The Local Government Association (LGA), which represents more than 370 councils in England and Wales, said authorities have been ‘on the front foot’ to carry out reviews on their high-rise buildings since the tragedy unfolded on Wednesday.

Extra fire safety checks were immediately organised across local authorities, including Camden, Newham, Croydon and Redbridge, in the wake of the blaze in north Kensington that claimed at least 30 lives.

Officials said robust measures were already in place to ensure tall blocks were safe, but that they would be revisited to see if any action needed to be taken.

It’s believed that police horses are standing at the end of the street (Picture: PA)

Lord Porter, LGA chairman, said: ‘Following the horrific fire at Grenfell Tower, councils with tower blocks in their local area have been working with their local fire service, and undertaking urgent reviews of their high-rise buildings.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘Fire risk assessments and the construction of buildings are being reviewed and double checks are being made to ensure remedial work recommended under previous assessments have been carried out.’

He said councils are also working closely with tenants to review and offer fire safety advice.