Simon Cowell's Grenfell Tower charity single has been released, raising money for those affected by the disaster.

The song, a modified cover of Simon and Garfunkel's Bridge Over Troubled Water, was recorded just half a mile from the 24-storey tower in West London.

It was written for the families of the 79 people who are now missing or presumed dead, after a huge fire engulfed the massive apartment block.

Over 50 artists from across the music industry have come together to cover the 1970 classic, including grime artist Stormzy, Brian May and popstars Ella Eyre and Robbie Williams.

Video: Rita Ora cried during Grenfell song recording

Singer Rita Ora, who lives just minutes away and helped victims just hours after the disaster, also contributed.

The single opens with a rap by Londoner Stormzy, who sings: "That could have been me up there, waving my white, plain tee up there, with my friends on the ground trying to see up there, I just hope that you're resting and you're free up there.

:: Thousands of pounds paid out to Grenfell Tower fire victims

"That could have been my mum's house or that could have been my nephew.

"I don't know where to begin, So I'll start by saying I refuse to forget you. I refuse to be silenced, I refuse to neglect you."

Video: Charity single happened 'really really quick'

Online reactions to the single have been positive, with users left "in tears" and "literally covered in goosebumps".

"Thank you to everyone for their help and support in making this happen," Cowell, who also lives nearby, wrote.

"As well as buying the single, we hope people can support those affected by the Grenfell fire by donating."

Former One Direction Liam Payne tweeted: "My thoughts go out to all of those affected by the Grenfell Tower fire. Please donate what you can."

Image: Simon Cowell, Rita Ora and Stormzy have all been involved in the single

Other artists who have lent their names, and their voices, to the song include Bastille, Brian May, James Blunt, Louis Tomlinson, Nile Rodgers, X Factor winner Matt Terry and recent Britain's Got Talent winner Tokio Myers.

Marking a week since the fire, the single was played across radio stations on Wednesday morning, while the video will be aired on ITV before Coronation Street.

All proceeds collected by Artists For Grenfell will be distributed via The London Community Foundation.