Labour leader writes to Theresa May after new inquiry chair says it will be limited to cause of fire and why it spread so quickly

Jeremy Corbyn expressed concern that the Grenfell Tower inquiry could have too narrow a remit after comments from the newly appointed chair suggested it would be limited to the cause of the fire and why it spread so quickly.



The leader of the Labour party wrote to the prime minister on Friday, saying that the terms of the inquiry should be broad because the deadly fire had “much wider implications for national policy issues”.

“It is vital that the voice of Grenfell residents and victims’ families are heard throughout the process and that they have full confidence,” he said. He called for a “two-part inquiry, with the first part looking at the specific issues around Grenfell and reporting back quickly, and the second part looking at the national issues”.

On Thursday, the head of the inquiry, Sir Martin Moore-Bick, alarmed residents and survivors by saying that the basis of the inquiry “would be pretty well limited to the problems surrounding the start of the fire and its rapid development, in order to make recommendations as to how this sort of thing can be prevented in the future”.

But lawyers with experience of public inquiries said they believed that Moore-Bick would probably change his stance. And the former lord chancellor Lord Falconer said survivors would be “incredibly upset” if the inquiry was limited to how the fire started and spread so fast. “The inquiry has got to look at how [the regulatory] regime developed, or I think the residents would feel they were let down. And I think that’s an absolutely legitimate concern on their part.”

But the judge must be “given a chance”, Falconer added. “One should not be too censorious about how he was at this first meeting of a type that he’d never done before. My own experience of him is that he’s an incredibly impressive, insightful and emotionally intelligent individual and he will do an extremely good job.”

Jamal Williams, who lives adjacent to Grenfell Tower, met Moore-Bick in a separate meeting from survivors. The meeting had left residents feeling that the consultation was a sham, he said. “It wasn’t a consultation, it was someone sent to tell us ‘this is what I’m doing and this is what is going to happen’. He was very frank. That’s not a consultation, that’s someone giving a message.”

Pete Weatherby QC, who acted for 22 families throughout the Hillsborough inquests, said there was “absolutely no reason at all” why a public inquiry could not have a much wider scope. Moore-Bick’s initial comments gave “a terrible message”, he added.

It was someone sent to tell us 'this is what I'm doing and this is what's going to happen'. That's not a consultation Jamal Williams

“It gives the message that there’s already thought been given to limiting the scope so that embarrassing policy questions that affect government and local government, such as privatisation and cuts, [are] pushed out,” he said. “That is very, very regrettable, particularly at this stage.”



A spokesman for the Grenfell Tower inquiry said Moore-Bick had started discussions with survivors and victims’ families, which would continue. “He will be consulting them further, together with other interested parties, on the terms of reference for the inquiry. He will then suggest to the prime minister what those terms of reference should be.” Moore-Bick is expected to report to parliament before the beginning of recess on 20 July.

Earlier this week Theresa May also informed ministers there could be a “major national investigation” into the issue of sub-standard cladding being used on buildings over decades, which could form a second element to the public inquiry along the lines suggested by Corbyn.