This page contains advice on where to seek urgent assistance and information, including the official helplines for this incident.

It also provides guidance on support services available for victims and all those affected by the Grenfell tragedy.

A dedicated website has been set up by Grenfell Support to assist people affected by the Grenfell tragedy.

Home Office extension to Grenfell immigration policy

The Home Office has announced changes to the immigration policy for survivors of the Grenfell tragedy. Foreign nationals affected by the Grenfell tragedy have been given an extra 2 months to come forward and access leave to remain in the UK.

The policy allows survivors who are eligible to stay in the UK and seek limited leave, and after 5 years leave under the policy they can obtain permanent residence with full access to relevant support and assistance. To access the scheme residents have been given until 31 January 2018 to speak to us in person.

In addition, the Home Office have announced a widening of the switching policy so that any survivor of the Grenfell tragedy with leave to remain in the UK through a different immigration route can come forward if they wish to switch into the dedicated Grenfell leave outside the rules route, before 31 January 2018.

Finally, anyone who has leave to remain in the UK through another category, such as family or work, who come forward by 31 January 2018 and qualify under the Grenfell immigration policy to access public funds and permission to work, will continue to have recourse to these in any further periods of limited leave granted under the Immigration Rules.

The government has always been clear that the welfare of survivors of the Grenfell tragedy is a top priority. The policy we have introduced will enable those who are eligible to regularise their stay in the UK, ensuring there is a firm legal basis for providing support, and enabling them to assist with the inquiry in the knowledge that their immigration status is secure.

Anyone who believes they are eligible and has not yet come forward can do so before 31 January 2018 by arranging an appointment at the Curve Community Centre with the Home Office team by calling 0208 196 4531; or by using the drop-in service every Thursday 2pm to 6pm.

Urgent advice and support for victims, their friends and families

Grenfell Support are currently responding to what the community are telling them they need. If you come to the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP you will be able to access services and support provided by the team from Monday to Friday, 10am to 8pm and Saturday to Sunday, 11am to 6pm.

There are a range of support services available in the Curve Community Centre. This includes housing needs, emergency funds, health, social care services, support from a range of organisations, food and above all, a kind and sympathetic team of people ready to provide advice on anything.

Residents who are displaced due to the Grenfell tragedy please call the Kensington and Chelsea Council housing line on 020 7361 3008.

Any family and friends concerned about their loved ones please contact the police investigation team on 0800 032 4539. If someone was reported as missing and has been found safe, please call the police investigation team with an update.

The Care for Grenfell team has been set up to talk to any residents that have been affected by the Grenfell tragedy who feel that their concerns or requests have not been fully answered. If people do have any questions or concerns that they feel haven’t been met, please call 020 7745 6414 or email careforgrenfell@rbkc.gov.uk. The line is open from Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.

NHS services

The NHS encourages Londoners to use NHS services wisely and seek advice from NHS 111 in the first instance.

In response to the needs of patients, NHS partners in West London have set up a multidisciplinary health outreach team to support patients, families and neighbours affected by the tragedy.

The team is currently located at the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP and is able to provide emotional support and physical checks. The health team is also able to signpost to GP services and more specialist mental health services.

The health outreach team is able to visit you at your place of residence or at another location of your choosing, such as a local community centre.

Non-urgent referrals can be made to the outreach team by calling 07712 231 133. This is a direct line to the team at the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP, who will organise a non-urgent visit.

The team can visit the patient on the day of the referral or the following day. Alternatively, referrals can be emailed to cnw-tr.westway@nhs.net.

The first port of call for physical, emotional or mental health needs for any resident should be your own GP. Your GP will provide the all-important continuity of care, and is able to signpost to more specialist services.

Local GP practices are well placed to support people with emotional and mental health needs with an enhanced service in place.

If you do not have a GP, you can register for one online at www.nhs.uk by entering your postcode. If you do not have access to the internet, please call 020 8962 4600 and a member of the team will help you.

The line is open Monday to Friday from 9am to 5pm.

Through the NHS 111 service, GP appointments are also available if needed at the St Charles Centre for Health and Wellbeing Integrated Care Centre, Exmoor Street, London W10 6DZ.

Those requiring an urgent mental health response should call 0800 0234 650.

Health visitors are also contacting all displaced families with young children.

Emergency fund for Grenfell Tower residents

The government has announced details of the emergency £5 million Grenfell Tower Residents’ Discretionary Fund for households who have lost their homes as a result of the Grenfell tragedy:

Every household whose home has been destroyed as a result of the Grenfell tragedy will receive a guaranteed £5,500 minimum down payment from the fund. This will be made up of a £500 cash payment and £5,000 delivered through the Department of Work and Pensions into bank accounts or similar in a single payment;

The £500 cash payment has already begun to be made available to those affected and further payments are available immediately from the council at the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP, or from Monday 19 June through the Post Office in Portobello Road, as and when families need it;

alternatively you can contact Mr Phil Black, 0207 641 2678, Mr David Hodgkinson, 0207 641 8162; or you can speak to your police family liaison officer who will help you with the process;

The £5,000 payment has been available since Monday 19 June and support workers will assist households in accessing it - including those who do not have bank accounts;

The fund is also being made available to meet funeral costs, and to top up payments for those households with complex or additional needs.

The fund is being kept under review and will increase if necessary.

Benefit enquiry line

The government has set up a dedicated benefit enquiry line for people affected by the Grenfell tragedy. The following numbers will be manned between 8am and 6.30pm, Monday to Friday:

020 7941 6661

020 7941 6634

020 7941 6671

The Department of Work and Pensions have announced that benefits will not be affected for people from W11 postcodes ending in 1TQ, 1TG, 1WA and 1WB. Any Work Capability Assessments and medical evidence deadlines will be postponed.

Banks offering help

The banking industry is ready to help people who have lost their homes in the Grenfell tragedy, who have also lost all access to their bank cards, accounts and ID documents. Banks have been contacting customers to provide assistance and arrange emergency access to funds.

Find out more information about what the banks are offering, with appropriate helpline numbers.

Support package across energy, water and telecommunications sectors

Utility companies have announced a package of support for victims of the Grenfell tragedy. Suppliers have agreed to write off outstanding utility bills for victims of the Grenfell tragedy, as well as providing other assistance. This support comes on top of £5 million fund to pay for emergency supplies, food, clothes and other costs.

Royal Mail support for Grenfell Tower residents

For directly affected customers, Royal Mail are making the following alternative service provisions:

a free mail redirection service for displaced residents; this can be arranged online at www.royalmail.com/redirection, at a Post Office® by completing a form (PDF, 1.77 MB) in the branch or printing this off, or by calling their dedicated emergency line on 01752 387 055

keeping the mail of affected residents safe until they are able to collect it, or contact Royal Mail to request it

providing a mobile service for customers to collect their mail, at the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP; this service can be arranged by calling 01752 387 055

Mail for Grenfell Tower can be collected from Royal Mail’s West London Delivery Office, Unit 20-23, West London Delivery Office, Premier Park Road, NW10 7NZ (open Monday to Friday, 8am to 2pm, and Saturday, 8am to 1pm).

Mail collection is also available by prior arrangement on Monday, Wednesday and Friday from the Royal Mail desk at the Curve Community Centre.

Please call 01752 387055 to make a mail collection arrangement. ID is required to collect your mail.

See further information about the support available from Royal Mail.

Transport for London support line for residents

A support line is now open from Transport for London to give travel support and advice for people affected by the Grenfell tragedy.

The support line can provide advice on a wide range of travel issues from a specialist team of advisors, including:

provision of Oyster and Zip cards to survivors as they are discharged from hospital

advice on topping up Oyster cards for those who have already received a new card

information about Dial-a-Ride for people who are unable to use public transport

journey planning for people who have moved to a new area

support to get replacement documents

The support line is 0800 222 9876 and is open every day from 10am to 6pm.

Hotpoint branded fridge freezers

If you’re concerned about your Hotpoint fridge freezer model number FF175BP or FF175BG call 0800 316 3826 or visit hotpointservice.co.uk/fridgefreezer.

See the latest list of household appliances (white goods) recalled due to fire risk at productrecall.campaign.gov.uk.

If you are a foreign national

Foreign nationals in the UK affected by this incident may wish to contact their embassy, high commission or consulate, which may also be able to provide information or assistance.

UK passports, visas and immigration support

The Home Office is giving residents more time to access its dedicated immigration scheme.

The Home Office is allowing those directly affected by the Grenfell tragedy to be granted temporary leave on an exceptional basis for 12 months with full access to support.

Those who consider they are eligible for the scheme can speak face-to-face to our specialist Home Office team at the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP from 10am to 8pm. You are welcome to bring someone with you to the centre to help you.

People directly affected by the Grenfell tragedy who are seeking guidance on UK passports, visas, or immigration, can call 0300 303 2832, 24 hours a day, to arrange for a call back by specialist teams.

The Home Office will not charge people who need to replace documentation that has been lost in the Grenfell tragedy.

Any calls from outside the UK should include the UK dialling code: +44(0)300 303 2832. Please note calls are in English for this dedicated line set up for those impacted by the Grenfell tragedy to help with passports, visas or immigration guidance.

The Home Office will not use this tragic incident as a reason to carry out immigration checks on those providing vital information to identify victims.

Driving licences and vehicle registration certificates

The DVLA has set up a dedicated enquiry line for residents affected by the tragedy who need to replace their driving licence or vehicle registration certificate. The number to call is 0300 083 0103 which will be staffed from 8am to 5pm between Monday and Friday.

Applications will be dealt with immediately and all fees that apply for issuing replacements will be waived.

Legal and housing advice

If your home was affected by the Grenfell tragedy:

call the council’s housing line on 020 7361 3008 for advice and support;

out-of-hours support is also available on 0800 137 111. Or you can also get help at the Curve Community Centre.

Grenfell Tower residents can get free legal and housing advice from Shelter.

Please call the London advice line on 0344 515 1540. Extended opening hours 8am to 8pm weekdays, 8am to 5pm weekends.

You can also:

attend a drop-in session at North Kensington Law Centre, from 10am to 5pm Monday to Friday

Shelter may also be able to arrange to come to you, if travelling is difficult.

See more general advice on Shelter’s website which might help if you’re feeling worried after the Grenfell tragedy.

The North Kensington Law Centre is offering legal advice for local residents affected by the Grenfell tragedy. You can:

drop in to see them Monday to Friday 10am to 5pm at Unit 15, Baseline Studios, Whitchurch Rd, London W11 4AT

call them on 020 8969 7473 or email them at info@nklc.co.uk

Discretionary Funding for residents who have returned to their homes

Funding for residents who have returned to their homes, but can show an on-going financial need due to the Grenfell tragedy can apply by phone by calling: 0207 745 6464.

An assessment will be undertaken over the phone, and any awards will be collectable from the Post Office, 325 Portobello Road, W10 5SY.

Legal aid

Legal aid is readily available to help individuals and families made homeless by this disaster. Funding is also available for families to support them as they prepare for inquests. We actively encourage any affected family to apply for funding, which is granted by the independent Legal Aid Agency. Find out more.

The Legal Aid Agency has provided a single email for enquiries about any aspect of the legal aid application process:

ContactECCmajorincidents@justice.gov.uk

Helpline advice is also available on how legal aid works for providers and victims by calling 0300 200 2020.

Emergency interpretation service

A team of professional interpreters are on hand at the Curve Community Centre, No 10 Bard Road, Nottingdale, West London, W10 6TP to help survivors and those affected by the Grenfell tragedy.

The emergency interpretation service can translate English into Arabic, Dari, Farsi, Urdu, Pashto, Turkish, Bengali and more.

The dedicated team is on hand during centre hours from Monday to Friday, 10am to 8pm and Saturday to Sunday, 11am to 6pm.

For more information, email emergencyinterpreters@gmail.com.

Support through the Public Inquiry

Victims and their families will receive funding for legal representation at the Public Inquiry, and victims will be fully consulted before the Inquiry begins, allowing them to say what they think it should cover. Speaking to those involved will make sure the Inquiry covers the tough questions that need answering. Details of how to access this legal funding and how the consultation is going to work will follow once the Inquiry has been set up.

See the Grenfell Tower Inquiry website for more information.

The Inquiry will be led by Sir Martin Moore-Bick, a retired judge, who will have the power to summon witnesses and hear evidence on oath. The inquiry will not delay the identification of those affected by this horrific incident.

Support for families over the summer

A new space for families will be available from Wednesday to Friday, 1pm to 5pm at Holmfield House, 4–6 Golborne Road, W10 5PE so that people can cook a meal, eat around a dining table and relax with their family.

They will also have access to a garden area and laundry facilities. The space has been open since Wednesday 2 August. Utensils, crockery, cutlery and table cloths will be available as well as some basic ingredients, however families should bring their own food and laundry supplies.

People who want to use the space should contact their Key Worker.

Summer childcare

For those who need additional support, childcare is available for 2 to 5 days per week over the summer holidays. Priority is given to children who are currently staying in hotels, however there are also places available in playschemes across the borough for children over the age of 6.

People should contact their Key Worker if they would like to discuss these options.

Childcare room at the Curve Community Centre

A childcare room is now open at the Curve Community Centre, 10 Bard Road, W10 6TP so that young people and families can enjoy entertainment and have fun. The room is open Monday to Friday, 10am to 5.30pm and on Saturdays from 11am to 3pm.

The room has space for up to 3 children at a time, and parents are asked to collect their children within an hour and a half. Although no childcare services will be available, parents can stay and play with their children.

Entertainment will include film screenings, child entertainers, art therapy or interactive shows. A family engagement officer will also be available on site every day to help families to access childcare, discuss their child’s needs and provide family support if needed.

Support from Key Workers

Key Workers are the first point of contact for affected residents and their families and can point you in the right direction to the support you need. They can be accessed at the Curve Community Centre, 10 Bard Road, W10 6TP from Monday to Friday, 10am to 8pm and Saturday to Sunday, 11am to 6pm.

Support offered by Key Workers ranges from help to obtain documents such as passports and driving licences, through to psychological support, as well as housing, education and health assistance.

To request a Key Worker, change a Key Worker, or if anyone is unable to reach their Key Worker, please ring the helpline on 020 7745 6400 or email GrenfellTowerKeyWorkerHub@rbkc.gov.uk. The line is open Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm. The team can be contacted out-of-hours on 020 7373 2227.

Mental health support

If you are affected by the Grenfell tragedy, either directly or indirectly, and in need of mental health support or psychological therapy you can call a dedicated NHS response service number where you can get access to mental health support services as well as information and advice 24 hours a day.

The number to call is 0800 0234 650 or email cnw-tr.spa@nhs.net.

NHS run a walk in service at the Curve Community Centre, 4 Bard Road, W10 6TP from Monday to Friday, 10am to 8pm and Saturday to Sunday, 11am to 6pm to help people that want to talk to someone about mental health support.

If you are worried about your mental health as a result of this event please see this NHS trauma leaflet (PDF, 50.2KB, 2 pages) It outlines common reactions, simple suggestions for how to cope and ways in which children may be supported to cope.

Many symptoms may be a normal response to a terrible experience and will reduce over time. If your symptoms are severe and you are in distress or they last longer than 4 weeks, this may indicate the need for support from a mental health professional. The information on the NHS Choices website will outline possible symptoms and describe how to seek help. Please visit your GP who will be able to provide advice and refer you on to the appropriate local NHS mental health service for assessment and treatment.

If you are under 18, or concerned about someone who is under 18, please look on NHS Choices for your local children and young people’s mental health service. Children and young people may also access NHS help by visiting their GP, and schools may be able to provide support or refer them to local services.

Samaritans offers emotional support round the clock. Anyone can contact Samaritans in confidence at any time for free from any phone on 116 123 (even if you don’t have credit on your mobile). This number will not show up on your phone bill.

Or you can text 07725 90 90 90 or email jo@samaritans.org or go to www.samaritans.org to find your nearest branch where you can talk to someone face to face.

CALM offers support to men, who can call the confidential helpline on 0808 802 58 58 or visit www.thecalmzone.net. The line is open every day from 5pm to 12 midnight.

In response to feedback, additional services are now available including:

sessions with the Samaritans in various hotels

a new safe space for out of hours emotional support, run by Hestia and located on Kingsdown Close. It is open all night, 7 days a week

Mental health and emotional support for young people

The Grenfell tragedy has left lots of young people worried and upset. If a young person in your family or who you care for has been affected, either directly or indirectly, there are lots of services available to help.

Support for children

If you are a parent, relative, friend or teacher of a child affected by the Grenfell tragedy, you may have questions about how to support them.

You can download a leaflet which includes:

guidance on how a child might behave or react after a tragic event

ideas for how you can support them

advice on explaining to a child what happened

contact details for organisations that you can talk to

Download the leaflet (PDF, 384 KB) online at www.rbkc.gov.uk/localoffer.

Support over the phone

Young people under 25 can call Childline on 0800 1111 and have a one-to-one chat with a supportive, trained counsellor anytime, day or night.

Young people can also call the Samaritans helpline on 116 123. The line is open 24 hours a day.

Online services

Kooth.com is a free online counselling service for children aged 11 to 19.

NHS Go provides health information for young people under the age of 25, including advice on coping with stress after a major incident.

Community organisations

The Good Grief Trust aims to ensure that young people can talk to someone and get free, confidential support. A programme of events will be taking place this summer to allow young people to have fun and receive one-to-one support if they have been affected by the Grenfell tragedy. Details of these events will be shared in the near future.

Art Therapy sessions with fully qualified art psychotherapists are taking place at the Al Manaar Muslim Cultural Heritage Centre every Saturday from 2pm to 4pm. Art therapy can be an excellent way for children and young people to address emotional issues. For more information contact Susan Rudnik at s.rudnik@gold.ac.uk or call 07932 054 834.

The Big House will provide fun and high energy drama workshops at local community centres throughout the summer. They create a safe space for children and young people to explore their feelings through drama. For more details contact Dawn Howley at dawn@thebighouse.uk.com.

Therapeutic centre for adults – Claire Gardens Children’s Centre, 349 Westbourne Park Road, W11 1EG Monday to Friday: 9.30am to 5.30pm. Therapies include Reiki, Indian head massage, massage and reflexology.

Overnight support at the Harrow Club, 187 Freston Road, W10 6TH. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday: 8pm to 8am. Provides support to people feeling depressed or anxious or are struggling to sleep.

Schools, youth clubs, play centres and children’s centres

The council is providing support in affected schools, including one to one counselling for pupils affected by the Grenfell tragedy, and support for family members. To find out what is available at your child’s school, speak to the school office.

An extended programme of activities is available through local youth clubs and play centres, including counselling, play and art therapy and support from mental health organisations such as Place2Be and MIND.

Local children’s centres and other childcare locations are able to offer advice and support for families, including helping families access counselling services.

Support for disabled children and children with learning difficulties

Full of Life Kensington and Chelsea is providing outreach counselling to support parents with disabled children. A programme of additional short breaks is being put in place for the summer period. Please visit their website for more details.

Extra support available

If you think a child or young person is in need of more support than can be provided by the services above, you can call the dedicated NHS response line on 0800 0234 650 or email cnw-tr.spa@nhs.net. This is available 24 hours a day. Please let the operator know you are calling as a result of the Grenfell tragedy.

Bereavement support

Cruse Bereavement Care is a national charity for bereaved people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Cruse offers support to adults, young people and children when someone dies, whatever the circumstances. They offer face-to-face, telephone, email and website support.

Their free phone helpline is 0808 808 1677 and is open Monday to Friday 9:30am to 5pm (excluding bank holidays), with extended hours to 8pm on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. You can also email them on helpline@cruse.org.uk.

Physical injuries

If you are experiencing or are concerned about physical problems, seek advice and help from one of the range of NHS services available.

Air quality and smoke exposure

See health advice from Public Health England following the Grenfell tragedy.

Business support advice

The Portobello Business Centre are acting as a first point of contact for people whose businesses may have been affected by the tragic events at Grenfell Tower.

020 7460 5050 Info@pbc.co.uk www.pbc.co.uk

For general advice for affected businesses, you can also contact the government’s Business Support Helpline.

Telephone: 0300 456 3565 Textphone: 0191 581 0052 enquiries@businesssupporthelpline.org Monday to Friday, 9am to 6pm

For more details on the support being given to businesses see the Grenfell Support website.

How you can help

Volunteer

If you would like to volunteer to help with the support effort being co-ordinated by Kensington and Chelsea Council please register your interest by emailing grenfellvolunteers@rbkc.gov.uk including your name, contact number and availability.

Donate

The Charity Commission has issued advice for anyone donating to those affected by the Grenfell tragedy to ensure that their donations go to legitimate charities.

Police appeal for photos/videos

The police are appealing for anyone with any photos or videos relating to the incident to send them to their investigation team. Please select ‘Grenfell Investigation’ from the drop down menu before uploading anything.