ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

A British music supergroup are set to release a charity single to raise funds for those affected by the Grenfell Tower blaze on Monday, Simon Cowell has revealed.

The Syco boss and X Factor judge announced that stars including former 1D hunk Liam Payne, London grime star Stormzy and X Factor winner Louisa Johnson will cover Simon and Garfunkel’s Bridge Over Troubled Water to raise money for those affected by the fire which ravaged a tower block in west London.

He told the Sun: “We only started 24 hours ago and already we are getting calls coming in, mainly from Brits.

“A lot of artists – people like Stormzy, Skepta, Emily Sande and the London Community Gospel Choir want to be involved.”

Inside Grenfell Tower 13 show all Inside Grenfell Tower 1/13 2/13 3/13 4/13 5/13 6/13 Water is sprayed on Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 7/13 Fire service personnel inside Grenfell Tower in west London PA 8/13 A view inside the Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 9/13 Sniffer dogs were sent inside to the tower today PA 10/13 Fire service personnel inside Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 11/13 Part of the scorched facade of the Grenfell Tower in London as firefighting continue to damp-down the deadly fire AP 12/13 Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 13/13 A view inside the Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA

London Grammar, The Who, Pixie Lott and James Arthur are also committed to perform, according to the Sun.

Mr Cowell said he hoped more people would join the line-up ahead of recording on Sunday.

The music mogul, who manages the likes of Little Mix and Ella Henderson, spoke of his heartbreak after driving past the scene of the fire which left at least 30 people dead and 10 more fighting for life in hospital.

Grenfell Tower tribute messages - In pictures 14 show all Grenfell Tower tribute messages - In pictures 1/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jeremy Selwyn 2/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell 3/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower 4/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower PA 5/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell 6/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell 7/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower AP 8/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jeremy Selwyn 9/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell 10/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell 11/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower PA 12/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower PA 13/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell 14/14 Tributes left close to Grenfell Tower Jonathan Mitchell

He told the newspaper: “It was very shocking, first to see how close it was and second, to look at the other ones still standing and think, ‘it could be them next’.

“You sit there and watch the news and go back and think, ‘what the f*** do you do?’

"I thought this was the best thing because it’s quick and I’ve done it before.”

Back in 2010, Cowell produced a charity single version of REM’s Everybody Hurts to raise money for victims off the Haiti earthquake, featuring Mariah Carey and Rod Stewart.

Stars including Adele, Rita Ora and Lily Allen have shown their support in the aftermath of the tragic fire that tore through the 27-storey Grenfell Tower in the early hours of Wednesday.

While Adele was pictured attending Wednesday night’s vigil in Kensington, Ora spent the day helping to sort clothes donations in her childhood neighbourhood.

"This is my neighbourhood I can't believe this is happening," she wrote on Twitter. "My prayers are with everybody involved my heart is beating so fast. I used to play in that block - I want to do all I can do to help.”