A drunk last night emerged as an unlikely hero in the Grenfell Tower atrocity - when he randomly hit the fourth floor lift button.

The swaying drinker got in the lift around 1am with 13th floor resident Miguel Alves, who was just getting home from work.

Miguel Alves raised the alarm telling as many neighbours as possible to get out

Eyevine The horrific Grenfell Tower fire has killed 17 people with the death toll expected to rise

He lurched towards the elevator control panel and happened to hit '4'...the level on which the inferno began allegedly from an exploding fridge.

When the doors opened, smoke came billowing in leaving the pair choking for breath.

Quick-thinking Miguel carried on up to his level and woke wife Fatima, daughter Ines, 16, and son Tiago -ordering them to get out.

Rex Features Tiago Alves was saved when his dad woke him up

Miguel then dashed around the building banging on the doors of as many neighbours as possible.

The dad has told his incredible story of good fortune to friends who have hailed his unselfish actions.

One said: "If that lift had not opened at the fourth floor many more lives would have been lost.

Getty Images The 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road was engulfed in flames in the early hours of June 14

Most read in news 'SHOULD I EAT IT?' The final words of rugby player left paralysed by eating slug as a dare EASTER MOANDAY UK set for 15cm of snow as freezing temperatures and torrential rain strike TOT TRAGEDY Baby girl dies after suffering cardiac arrest at West Midlands Safari Park PAW-FECT PALS Boy bullied for different coloured eyes and cleft lip adopts identical cat DUMPED BY POST Meghan ended marriage 'out of the blue' by moving out and POSTING rings back 'HE'S LIKE JESUS' Boy, 2, wakes up from coma just as family agree to turn off life support WAREHOUSE BLAZE Fire erupts near the Olympic Park as thick black smoke seen across London EASTER CARNAGE Revellers strip off and throw up as hundreds hit the town on Easter Saturday MURDER CAPITAL Man stabbed to death in the street is 13th London murder victim in 19 days THREE LION FAN FEARS ISIS 'planning drone bomb attacks' on England fans at Russia World Cup

Rex Features Ines sat her GCSE chemistry exam the morning after the fire

Rex Features Fire ferociously ripped through Grenfell Tower in Kensington, West London

"He doesn't know whether the drunk was just 'joyriding' in the lift or was searching for his flat - but it was incredibly fortunate he hit that button. Miguel was a star...but he would not want anyone to say that.

"The last I heard was the children were staying with school pals while the parents were waiting to be rehoused."

Getty Images Grenfell Tower pictured the day after dozens were killed in devastating fire

Brave Ines grabbed her GCSE revision papers and after scrambling to safety swotted up outside the blazing block.

She then attended Sacred Heart Schooligan in Hammersmith, West London, that morning to sit her GCSE chemistry exam.

HOW YOU CAN DONATE TO HELP THOSE AFFECTED Today The Sun pledges £100,000 to the victims of the Grenfell Tower tragedy but they also need your help. You can make a donation by text. Text GREN88 and the amount you wish to donate to 70070, eg GREN88 £5. You can donate £5 or £10.

What we know so far: