Image copyright PA Image caption Cowell's Holland Park home is a short distance away from Grenfell Tower

Simon Cowell has said he intends to record a charity single to help the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire.

"We hope to confirm a record tomorrow which will raise some money for the many people affected by this tragedy," the pop impresario wrote on Thursday.

Cowell, who lives in the same London borough as the now burnt-out tower, called the blaze "heartbreaking".

It is not yet known which acts will appear on the single or when it will be released.

Image copyright @SimonCowell Image caption The pop mogul announced his plans on Twitter on Thursday

Seventeen people are known to have died in the fire, though there are fears the death toll could exceed 60.

Cowell previously produced a charity single for the victims of the Haiti earthquake.

Mariah Carey, Kylie Minogue and Sir Rod Stewart were among the stars who appeared on the 2010 version of REM's Everybody Hurts.

It has also been announced that a special "Night of Comedy" will be held at the Hammersmith Apollo in aid of people affected by the fire.

Jo Brand, Kevin Bridges, Alan Carr and Michael McIntyre are among those who are lined up to appear at the west London venue on 27 June.

'We stand with you London'

Oscar-winning German composer Hans Zimmer expressed his condolences at the first of two London concerts on Thursday and pledged to donate proceeds from the evening to those affected.

"We stand with you London," he tweeted after Thursday's event at the SSE Arena Wembley. Zimmer has composed music for such films as The Lion King, Gladiator and Interstellar as well as the soundtrack for TV's Planet Earth II.

Image copyright EPA Image caption Zimmer has written scores for a host of films

Singers Adele and Rita Ora have both made personal visits to the scene of the fire, which broke out shortly before 01:00 BST on Wednesday morning.

Adele attended a vigil that took place in west London on Wednesday night, while Ora helped out with the relief effort.

Actor and director Noel Clarke also went to assist victims, while singer Lily Allen has been on hand to give support and interviews to the media.

Former Top Gear presenter Jeremy Clarkson also used social media this week to exhort the "people of Kensington... to give what you can spare."

Other fundraising initiatives include a #Grime4Grenfell event that was held on Thursday in the Shepherd's Bush area.

In related news, the BBC has announced it is to show a different instalment of its new Saturday night singing series Pitch Battle than the one originally scheduled.

"Due to song lyrics and themes, the decision has been taken to replace the original opening episode," the corporation said in a statement.

Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.