At least 20 tower blocks across the capital, ranging from 11 to 23 storeys, are believed to have the same cladding used on Grenfell

Fire safety experts called for a ban on the use of combustible materials in the construction of high-rise buildings in the UK as contractors confirmed that panels used to clad Grenfell Tower were the cheaper, more flammable version of two available options.

A Worcester-based firm, Omnis Exteriors, said it had supplied Reynobond PE cladding panels as part of the refurbishment of the west London tower block that was overseen by the construction firm Rydon Maintenance in 2012.

The panels contain flammable polyethylene and are £2 cheaper per square metre than the alternative, fire-resistant Reynobond FR. Rydon Maintenance subcontracted the installation of the panels to a smaller company called Harley Facades, which confirmed that it had used the panels.

At least 20 tower blocks across the capital, ranging from 11 to 23 storeys, are believed to have the same cladding used at Grenfell, according to Construction Enquirer, a trade publication.

Professor Geoff Gibson at Newcastle University, who has advised the US Navy and the oil and gas industry on the use of fire-resistant materials, said those buildings must now be made safe. “I think all these panels will have to come off, and that will cost a lot of money,” he said.



The warning came as the Metropolitan police confirmed that the death toll from the blaze had risen to 30, including one victim who had died in hospital. However, a total of 70 people are believed still to be unaccounted for, and in a briefing, Metropolitan police commander Stuart Cundy said that it was inevitable that the death toll would increase as the task of identification continued. “I do believe that sadly the number will rise,” he said.

The officer said that 12 bodies were in the mortuary, but a number remained in Grenfell Tower, where a dignified and careful retrieval operation would take place in hazardous conditions, which could take several weeks. “The building itself is in a very hazardous state. It is going to take a period of time for our specialists, both from the police and from the London fire brigade, to fully search that building to make sure we locate and recover everybody that has sadly perished in that fire. We will be doing that as swiftly as we can.”

Fire investigators have yet to determine the cause of the fire or why it tore through the 24-storey block in the early hours of Wednesday. But as experts with the European Commission gathered in Brussels on Friday for a planned meeting on the fire safety of building facades, fire safety groups urged countries to ban the use of any combustible materials in the construction of buildings that firefighters cannot reach from ladders on the ground.



At least seven countries – Germany, Denmark, Croatia, Poland, Slovakia, Serbia and the Czech Republic – have recently changed their building regulations to ensure that only non-combustible materials are used on the facades of buildings above certain heights, ranging from 12m to 25m. Fire Safe Europe, a body that campaigns for fire safety on the continent, said other countries must now follow suit.

Fire Safe Europe has asked the European Commission to drop small-scale tests of building materials in favour of large-scale tests that demonstrate how cladding and other materials behave in real fires. While materials can pass what are essentially lab tests, real life fires can be very different, the organisation argues.

In addition to changes in fire performance tests, the body called for further tests to record the toxic chemicals released in smoke produced by building materials when they catch fire.

British building regulations allow aluminium cladding with a plastic core to be used on tower blocks if they pass a test that shows that fire cannot spread over its surface. But Phil Barry, managing director of CWB fire safety consultants in Gloucestershire, described the test as inadequate. “We need to do full-scale tests to see how these materials perform in the real world. In a full-scale test, the outside sheet fails, and it exposes the plastic core, which then burns. That’s what causes the problem,” he said. “We should be saying no combustible materials on buildings above 18m.”

Jim Glockling, technical director at the Fire Protection Association, an industry body, said that while it can be acceptable to use combustible materials on buildings, they must be fitted properly with other fire protection measures to ensure any outbreak is held back long enough for residents to escape.



But he warned of an ongoing trend in the construction industry that has seen the amount of combustible material rise in structures, cladding and insulation. “We see industry and warehousing fires on this scale almost every week and we know very well why they happen. It’s because the modern methods of construction and the materials used increase the combustible content,” he said. “We are now seeing buildings taken down by some very minor initiating events, such as a discarded cigarette setting fire to leaf litter, and that fire is able to get into cladding, voids and the structure of the building.”

The investigation into the blaze will look at whether the cladding was a factor in the fire’s quick spread, but scores of other fire protection measures should have been in place too. Even if the cladding helped spread the fire, it is unclear how the inferno took hold so rapidly inside the building when fire barriers at every floor should have held it back.



Legally binding building regulations from 2010 state: “The external walls of the building shall adequately resist the spread of fire over the walls.” Separate guidance, which sets out how to comply with the regulations, includes specifications on the type of material that can be used in external cladding. The guidance can only be ignored if there are mitigating circumstances, such as alternative safety measures.

The Department for Communities and Local Government said: “Cladding using a composite aluminium panel with a polyethylene core would be non-compliant with current Building Regulations guidance. This material should not be used as cladding on buildings over 18m in height.”

Reynobond PE, understood to have been used on the Grenfell Tower, is made with a polyethylene core.

One fire safety expert, who asked not to be named because he runs a private company, said he could not envisage any mitigating factors that would allow the use of Reynobond PE.

An investigation led by a senior detective from Scotland Yard’s homicide and major crime command is under way. “If criminal offences have been committed it is us who will investigate that,” Cundy said.