ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

Six hundred high rise blocks in the United Kingdom could have cladding similar to Grenfell Tower, it has emerged.

Only three have so far been identified as being "combustible" at this stage, according to a Government spokesman.

Downing Street said councils have sent in estimates that reveal a total of 600 high-rise buildings that could be a fire risk which require testing.

However the Department for Communities and Local Government said the estimated figure referred to buildings over 18 metres high with aluminium cladding - not necessarily of a similar type to that used at Grenfell.

Camden council said it has identified five towers which will have to have cladding removed. They said the towers have fire proof insulation but do contain similar materials to those used at Grenfell Tower.

Officials said they are to remove cladding from five blocks on the Chalcots Estate amid concerns it could be flammable.

London Mayor Sadiq Khan said: “The news this morning confirms people’s worst fears that there is a real risk that other tower blocks across Britain are at risk from combustible cladding.

“There is now a huge amount of work to urgently do to ensure that the Fire Brigade are satisfied that it is safe for people to remain in properties affected.

“If not, the government must support people being rehoused immediately while cladding is being removed."

The Standard revealed this week that more than 100 social housing blocks in London have cladding, with a small number of these having similar materials to that used at Grenfell.

Three blocks in Barnet are believed to have similar cladding of aluminium composite material. The council insisted that the overall cladding system on its blocks was different to Grenfell and that the insulation was non-combustible.

Town halls were today rushing to inform residents of affected blocks discovered to have the combustible material in a bid to avoid panic.

However, the discovery threatens to erupt into a major housing crisis if residents remain unsatisfied by reassurances from town halls and fire chiefs that there buildings are safe.

Testing of cladding panels showed they are “made up of aluminium panels with a polyethylene core,” Camden Council said.

Residents will stay in the five towers while the cladding is removed and the council will carry out 24/7 fire safety patrols on the estate’s corridors.

London tower blocks with cladding Barnet – The council manages 24 high-rise blocks in total. Barnet Homes, the council-owned company which runs the housing stock, is reviewing safety in 10 blocks. Three of these blocks, which were reclad in 2012, have been inspected and have similar rain-screen panels to Grenfell, but the cladding is different and non-combustible. The other seven blocks have different cladding to Grenfell. Barking and Dagenham – Four of the council’s blocks have cladding, but not the same type as used on Grenfell Tower. Camden – The council is set to remove cladding from five tower blocks on Chalcots Estate after they were tested this week. Although the cladding is different to that used in Grenfell, the tests suggested the materials used were not to the standard the council had commissioned. Greenwich – There are 105 buildings of six storeys or more in the borough. None of these buildings are clad with the same cladding as Grenfell Hammersmith and Fulham – The council owns three tower blocks which had cladding, although the materials used are not similar to Grenfell Tower. Havering – The council has no tower blocks over 14 storeys. They are beginning inspections on the blocks they do have. Richmond – The council has two 15-storey blocks in Richmond upon Thames. These have both been recently refurbished and over-clad with fire resistant cladding. Sutton – The council has pledged to undergo a “comprehensive review of fire safety” in its eight blocks of between six and 16 storeys. Two blocks have cladding but using different materials than what was used in Grenfell. Wandsworth – There are only three blocks in the borough with cladding. The council has inspected the three blocks where external cladding was fitted and are confident the blocks are safe. More tests are being carried out.

Councillor Georgia Gould, Leader of Camden Council, said: “The arrangement of the cladding and insulation used on Camden Council’s buildings significantly differs from that on Grenfell Tower.

"It includes fire-resistant rock wool insulation designed to prevent the spread of fire and fire resistant sealant between floors, designed to stop a high-intensity flat fire from spreading to neighbouring flats.

"This arrangement previously contained a fire at a flat in Taplow block in 2012.

Inside Grenfell Tower 13 show all Inside Grenfell Tower 1/13 2/13 3/13 4/13 5/13 6/13 Water is sprayed on Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 7/13 Fire service personnel inside Grenfell Tower in west London PA 8/13 A view inside the Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 9/13 Sniffer dogs were sent inside to the tower today PA 10/13 Fire service personnel inside Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 11/13 Part of the scorched facade of the Grenfell Tower in London as firefighting continue to damp-down the deadly fire AP 12/13 Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA 13/13 A view inside the Grenfell Tower in west London after a fire engulfed the 24-storey building PA

"These are significant and proven arrangements to stop the spread of fire.

“The new results from the laboratory show that the outer cladding panels themselves are made up of aluminium panels with a polyethylene core.

“Therefore the panels that were fitted were not to the standard that we had commissioned. In light of this, we will be informing the contractor that we will be taking urgent legal advice.”

At least 79 people were killed in the blaze at Grenfell tower in west London last week.

The Prime Minister was also urged to set up an emergency fire protection fund to protect residents in tower blocks.

Housing expert Karen Buck, Labour MP for Westminster North, said: “This must not be left to a postcode lottery of safety.”

Three victims of the blaze being treated at King’s College Hospital have been given the hydrogen cyanide poisoning antidote (“Cyanokit”) as a precaution against the effects of cyanide poisoning.

More than £700,000 has been paid out to victims so far, who will not have to repay the cash, and a central command centre has been set up to control the response, with more than 600 people working to support victims in the area.

Sixty-eight flats have also been acquired in the luxury Kensington Row development for families who lost their homes in the blaze.

Mrs May also said the tragedy will not be used to carry out immigration checks on those affected by the tragedy or on those providing “vital” information to identify victims or to assist the criminal investigation.