A firefighter reacts after battling a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower, a 24-storey apartment block in North Kensington, London (Picture: EPA)

Firefighters have been praised for their immense bravery while battling the enormous blaze at Grenfell Tower.

Crews of around 250 firefighters from London Fire Brigade have been fighting the huge fire in west London for 12 hours.

Initial calls reporting the blaze were received just before 1am, with firefighters reaching the scene just six minutes later.

How to help those affected by the Grenfell Tower fire in London

Over 450 emergency service staff have been on the scene on Latimer Road, many of whom will have responded to the London Bridge attack less than a fortnight ago.

Brave emergency services have been seen pooling together in the wake of the incident, with London police officers using their riot shields to protect fire fighters from debris falling from the high rise block of flats on Latimer Road in north Kensington.

Advertisement

Advertisement

London Fire Commissioner Dany Cotton said the scale of the fire was ‘unprecedented’ and crews were likely to be on the scene for at least 24 hours.

Firefighters train a water jet onto the lower reaches of the burning building (Picture: Rex)

Firefighters battle a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower, a 24-storey apartment block in North Kensington, London (Picture: EPA)

A police officer protects a firefighter with a riot shield (Picture: PA)

While Mayor of London Sadiq Khan was quick to commend firefighters in the capital.

Desperate woman threw baby from 10th floor during devastating Grenfell Tower fire

Visiting the scene of the devastating fire after six people were confirmed dead, Khan said: ‘I’m truly devastated to see the horrific scenes of the major fire at Grenfell Tower in Kensington. I have been in constant contact throughout the night with the Commissioner of the London Fire Brigade, Dany Cotton, who has been at the scene.

‘More than 250 firefighters are at the scene and there have been more than 100 medics in attendance, as well as 100 police officers.

‘I want to thank our incredible firefighters and emergency services for their immense courage, dedication and professionalism.

A large group of firefighters rest at the scene of a huge fire at Grenfell tower block in White City, London (Picture: LNP)

Firefighters rest as they take a break in battling a massive fire that raged in a 27-floor high-rise apartment building (Picture: AP)

Many firefighters take a break at the scene of a huge fire at Grenfell Tower (Picture: LNP)

Firefighters walk towards the fire at the scene at the Grenfell Tower (Picture: EPA)

A firefighter pours water over his head after battling a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower (Picture: EPA)

A firefighter near the scene of a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower (Picture: EPA)

‘My heart goes out to everyone affected. I am sad to confirm that we now know there have been fatalities and more than fifty people have been taken to hospitals including Royal Free, King’s, St Thomas’s, St Mary’s and Chelsea and Westminster to be treated for injuries.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Mosques, temples and churches open their doors to help Grenfell Tower residents

‘The fire service is dealing with a rapidly changing situation and these numbers are likely to rise.’

Flames tore up the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in north Kensington, leaving people trapped on upper floors, some holding babies from windows and others jumping from their flats.

Commander Stuart Cundy, of the Metropolitan Police, said: ‘I can confirm six fatalities at this time but this figure is likely to rise during what will be a complex recovery operation over a number of days.’

A man is rescued by fire fighters after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential block in Latimer Road (Picture: Getty)

A single firefighter tackles the building in west London (Picture: Getty)

Fire crews are searching the tower and Mr Cundy added: ‘I do anticipate that there may be people within that building that are as yet unaccounted for.’

NHS England said 74 people are being treated in six hospitals across the capital, of whom 20 are in critical care.

Crowdfunding page to help the residents devastated by the Grenfell Tower fire

Mr Cundy said it is likely to be some time before police can identify the victims, adding that it is too early to speculate on the cause of the fire.

Prime Minister Theresa May was said to be ‘deeply saddened by the tragic loss of life’ and newly appointed police and fire minister Nick Hurd will chair a meeting of the Civil Contingencies Secretariat to co-ordinate the response.

London Fire Commissioner Dany Cotton told reporters: ‘This is an unprecedented incident. In my 29 years of being a firefighter, I have never ever seen anything of this scale.’

Grenfell Tower was built in 1974 and contains 120 flats thought to be home to between 400 and 600 people.

The building was refurbished recently at a cost of £8.6 million, with work completed in May last year.

Police from the Tactical Support Group arrive to assist firefighters at the scene of a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower (Picture: EPA)

A firefighter investigates a floor after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London (Picture: PA)

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Rydon, the firm that carried it out, said its work ‘met all required building control, fire regulation, and health and safety standards.’

Advertisement

London Fire Brigade said the cause of the fire is still being investigated, but several residents reported one man had said it started in his faulty fridge.

The brigade said a structural engineer had checked the building and determined it was not in danger of collapse and that rescue teams were safe to be inside.

Many traumatic accounts of the fire and its impact have emerged, including a baby being dropped from the tower.

Samira Lamrani said she saw a woman try to save the baby by dropping it from a window ‘on the ninth or 10th floor’ to waiting members of the public below.

Residents who escaped complained there had been no fire alarm, with many relying on neighbours to wake them as the blaze spread.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video