Scores of people died after a huge fire engulfed Grenfell Tower, a west London residential tower block, in the early hours of Wednesday, 14 June.

What happened?

The fire was reported at the 24-storey block in North Kensington at 00:54 BST (23:54 GMT), leading to 40 fire engines and more than 200 firefighters tackling the blaze.

It took until 01:14 BST the following day to get it under control, with the fire affecting most floors of the building and destroying 151 homes, both in the tower and surrounding areas.

The Metropolitan Police says it will consider manslaughter, health and safety and fire safety charges.

How many victims are there?

Image caption Several of the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire have now been identified

Police say that while 80 people are currently presumed to have died, the final toll will not be known until at least the end of the year.

Westminster Coroner Dr Fiona Wilcox said on 12 July that 34 victims had been identified.

The Metropolitan Police say it believes there were about 255 survivors from the fire.

"Extensive investigations" have led them to conclude 350 people should have been in the tower block on the night of the blaze.

Fourteen residents were not in the building at the time, leaving at least 80 people dead or missing, the Met said.

Thirty-two people have been formally identified by the coroner, but not all names have been released.

Metropolitan Police Commander Stuart Cundy has said there is "a risk that sadly we may not be able to identify everybody".

He announced on 5 July that the last of the visible human remains had been forensically recovered from the building.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Footage shows the extent of damage

London Mayor Sadiq Khan said fire crews only managed to reach the 12th floor at the height of the fire.

There were claims from within the local community - and by celebrities such as Lily Allen and rapper Akala - that the true death toll was being suppressed by the media.

What caused the fire?

The fire started in a Hotpoint fridge freezer, but police said it was not started deliberately.

Footage has shown the fire spreading up one side of the building externally, before engulfing the entire block.

Downing Street ordered immediate testing of the fridge freezer that was involved.

Owners of a white Hotpoint fridge freezer model number FF175BP or graphite fridge freezer model number FF175BG should ring 0800 316 3826 or visit the Hotpoint website.

How did firefighters respond?

More than 200 firefighters and 40 fire engines were involved in battling the blaze.

They were called at 00:54 BST, but it took until 01:14 BST - just over 24 hours later - to get the fire under control.

The blaze affected most floors of the building and destroyed 151 homes, both in the tower and surrounding areas.

Image caption Forty fire engines and more than 200 firefighters tackled the blaze

The fire brigade rescued 65 people.

However, a BBC investigation has found a series of failings hampered the efforts of firefighters to tackle the fire and rescue the building's residents.

Crews cited low water pressure, radio problems and equipment that was either lacking or did not arrive before the fire got out of control.

What about the cladding?

Image copyright Reuters

The cladding - installed on Grenfell Tower in a recent renovation - has come under scrutiny, with experts saying a more fire-resistant type could have been used.

Both the cladding and insulation on the outside of the building failed all preliminary tests by the police. The insulation samples burned more quickly than the cladding tiles.

Documents obtained by the BBC suggest the cladding fitted during its refurbishment was changed to a cheaper version.

They show the zinc cladding originally proposed was replaced with an aluminium type, which was less fire resistant, saving nearly £300,000.

Cladding can create cavities which in some cases can cause a chimney effect, drawing flames up the cavity if there are no fire barriers.

The Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) said composite aluminium panels with a polyethylene core should not be used as cladding on buildings over 18m high.

Engineering and manufacturing company Arconic later said one of its products, Reynobond PE (polyethylene) - an aluminium composite material - was "used as one component in the overall cladding system" of Grenfell Tower.

What do we know about Grenfell Tower?

Image copyright Reuters Image caption Smoke could be seen from miles away

Grenfell Tower was built in 1974 by Kensington and Chelsea London Borough Council.

An £8.6m refurbishment - which was part of a wider transformation of the estate - was completed by Rydon Construction in May last year. Work included new exterior cladding, replacement windows and a communal heating system.

There was also extensive remodelling of the bottom four floors, creating seven additional homes, and improvements to communal facilities.

Plans for the development show how the building was modified and the single stairway.

Rydon said it was "shocked to hear of the devastating fire", adding that the work met "all required building regulations".

The tower is managed by the Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO) on behalf of the council.

Grenfell Tower, North Kensington 127 flats

24 storeys

20 residential levels

4 mixed levels of community areas and residential flats

2016 refurbishment completed AFP

Had there been safety concerns about the tower?

The Grenfell Action Group had claimed, before and during the refurbishment, that the block constituted a fire risk and residents had warned that access to the site for emergency vehicles was "severely restricted".

In February 2013 residents warned fire safety equipment, including fire extinguishers, had not been tested for 12 months.

KCTMO said it was aware that concerns had been raised historically by residents and they would form part of its investigations.

The tower block was given a medium fire risk rating - defined as a normal fire risk - in 2016 following completion of the refurbishment by the London Fire Brigade and Kensington and Chelsea Council.

The council insists the block has been regularly inspected, but London Mayor Sadiq Khan said safety and maintenance issues would have to be looked at.

The fire safety advice for Grenfell Tower residents was to "stay put" - unless the fire was affecting their own flat.

This is because tower block flats are built as a fire-resistant box, completely surrounded by fire-resisting construction from the rest of the building.

What did witnesses say?

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption London fire: Families threw children out of Grenfell Tower to safety

Eyewitnesses said they saw people trapped inside the burning building screaming for help, and shouting for their children to be saved.

Some said they saw lights - thought to be mobile phones or torches - flashing at the top of the block of flats, and trapped residents coming to their windows - some holding children.

Eyewitness Jody Martin said: "I watched one person falling out, I watched another woman holding her baby out the window... hearing screams."

Tiago Etienne, 17, saw small children being thrown out of the building from as high as the 15th floor.

Christos Fairbairn, 41, a resident on the 15th floor, told the BBC how he managed to brave the toxic smoke and make his way out of the burning building.

What has happened since the fire?

Image copyright AFP

Dozens of people stormed Kensington and Chelsea Town Hall demanding more support for the fire's survivors.

Prime Minister Theresa May came in for criticism over her reaction to the Grenfell Tower fire, and she told the House of Commons that the official response had "not been good enough".

She also pledged £5m for clothes, food and emergency supplies but was still booed when she paid a visit to the area.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn called for empty flats in North Kensington to be "requisitioned if necessary" for those left homeless by the fire.

Kensington and Chelsea council's chief executive, Nicholas Holgate, resigned amid criticism over the borough's response.

The council's leader Nick Paget-Brown also resigned following continued criticism of the council's handling of the tragedy.

The chief executive of Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation, the council's arms-length body which manages the tower, has also stepped down to "concentrate on assisting with the investigation and inquiry".

The government has ordered a taskforce to take over the housing department, as well as other council operations.

Image copyright PA Image caption Sir Martin has faced calls to step down as head of the Grenfell Tower Inquiry

A retired judge, Sir Martin Moore-Bick, has been appointed to head an inquiry into the fire, the remit of which will be decided by the prime minister.

A senior source has told the BBC Sir Martin is prepared to be "very broad" when looking at the causes of the fire, after he had previously said it was unlikely it would look at wider social issues in Kensington and Chelsea,

But he has already faced criticism from residents and calls to stand down, with Kensington's new Labour MP Emma Dent Coad, describing him as a "technocrat" who lacked "credibility" with victims.

A consultation with residents to help define the scope of the inquiry is due to end on 14 July. However, residents have called for this to be extended by up to six weeks so they can seek legal advice.

The Queen and Prince William also visited volunteers helping those affected.

A relief fund has raised more than £3m to help those affected by the fire, and a single released by more than 50 music artists reached number one, two days after being released.

The Department of Work and Pensions (DWP) provided a one-off £5,000 payment to affected households soon after the fire.

Some people are being temporarily housed in hotels and the government announced that 68 social housing flats in Kensington Row, about 1.5 miles away from Grenfell Tower, would be made available to survivors.

By 12 July, 22 offers of alternative housing had been accepted, according to the Grenfell fire response team. But North Kensington Law Centre - which represents more than 100 Grenfell victims - said many of the offers had been unsuitable.

What about other tower blocks?

Image copyright Reuters Image caption People have been evacuated from tower blocks in north London

The government announced plans to carry out tests on 600 buildings around the country, and so far at least 259 of them have failed.

The tests currently being conducted focus on the filler - the core of the cladding panel - to check how combustible it is.

Residents were evacuated from four blocks on the Chalcots Estate in Swiss Cottage, north London, with five buildings failing cladding tests.

Camden Council said it was forced to ask residents to leave because not only did the buildings fail external cladding fire safety tests, they also had multiple other fire safety failures.

Communities Secretary Sajid Javid has also said safety checks are urgently needed in hospitals, offices and private buildings.

NHS England is in contact with about 200 health trusts to check cladding on hospitals, he added.

Get news from the BBC in your inbox, each weekday morning