Relatives of three people who died in the Grenfell Tower fire hugged and wept as they exchanged condolences at inquest hearings.

On Wednesday, the Westminster coroner, Fiona Wilcox, opened and suspended inquests into 12-year-old Biruk Haftom, described by his family as “wise beyond his years”, Raymond Bernard, 63, and Denis Murphy, 56.



Why Grenfell survivors can't begin to recover while painful limbo continues Read more

Wilcox said that 58 victims of the fire had been identified but that the investigation was now slow and identifications were becoming increasingly difficult. All those who had been identified had been on the missing list, she said. At least 80 people died, according to police.



Bernard’s remains were recovered from his flat on the 23rd floor of Grenfell Tower and he was identified by dental records. The preliminary cause of death was given as “consistent with the effects of fire”.

Bernard – known to his friends as Moses – was “dearly loved by us all and will be sadly missed by many”, his family said in a statement.

Wilcox said Bernard’s remains were found along with those of several other people in his flat. One of those was Biruk, who was also identified by dental records. His mother, Berkti Haftom, 29, also died in the fire, and an inquest into her death was opened and suspended in July. The mother and son are believed to have lived on the 18th floor.

In a statement released by the Metropolitan police, their family said: “Biruk was a loving, pure-hearted boy, wise beyond his years and known for his politeness, kind heart and his love for his family and friends. Berkti and Biruk left an everlasting legacy full of lovely memories, and their contagious laughter and charisma will live in our hearts forever.

“We are deeply hurt and heartbroken our angels were taken from us so cruelly, so young. We will not rest until justice is served.”

Murphy’s remains were recovered from the 14th floor, where he was believed to have been trapped by the fire. He was identified by dental records.

Last week, his family, originally from Ireland, said: “The pain, loss and sorrow we feel is indescribable and we have been left devastated with a gaping hole in our hearts that can never be filled.”

Murphy was “an inspiration and an amazing, selfless, caring person and we feel lucky and blessed that he was part of our family, and his warmth and love will stay with us forever. What really matters to us is what he stood for – family, friends, community, loyalty and love – and our lives will never be the same without him.”

At the end of the hearing, relatives of all three victims embraced and shook hands.

Wilcox suspended the inquests to allow the public inquiry and criminal investigation to proceed.

A preliminary hearing of the public inquiry, chaired by Sir Martin Moore-Bick, a retired judge, is due to take place next week. The inquiry is expected to start hearing evidence in October.