06:41

Missing following the fire at Grenfell Tower in west London: Clockwise from top left: Khadija Saye, Mariem Elgwahry, Ali Yawar Jafari, and Jessica Urbano Ramiez. Composite: Social media/Handout/PA

Here’s what we know about those people still missing.



Khadija Saye

Saye, 24, is a photographer who recently exhibited her work at the Venice Biennale, and is believed to have been living in a flat with her mother, Mary Mendy. David Lammy, MP for Tottenham, a friend, has appealed for information, tweeting to say the young photographer was a “dear friend, a beautiful soul and emerging artist”.



Saye was last heard from at 3am when she messaged on Facebook that she was unable to get out of the flat as the smoke was so thick.

Mary Mendy, 53, has been registered as living in the tower block for at least 20 years. She is believed to have been living on the 17th floor of the building.

Jessica Urbano

Jessica, 12, lived on the 20th floor and became separated from her family. Ana Ospina, a makeup artist, said she had visited a number of hospitals trying to find out about her niece. She was also reported to have been put into an ambulance. Another aunt, Sandra, told the Mirror “somebody gave her a phone and she rang her mum at 1.29am and at 1.39am”. She was believed to be a with a group of people on the fire stairs.

Farah Hamdan, her husband Omar Belkadi and six-month-old daughter Leena Belkadi

The family, including two other children who have since been found, were on the 20th floor. Farah called her sister at around 1am. She was told by the family to leave, but said she had been told to “stay put”. Her cousin, Adel Chaoui, said the two children found were in hospital, but one was in a coma. “No one knows what will happen. The other one is traumatised and sedated but otherwise OK.”

Mariem Elgwahry

Friends appealed for information about the 27-year-old, who is believed to have been living on the 19th floor. One woman posted she had last been heard from at 2.30am and was with her mother when she called. According to records, a man called Ahmed Elgwahry was also living in the property.

Abdulaziz Wahabi, wife Faouzia, and children Nurhouda, Yassin and Medhi

All lived on the 21st floor of the tower, according to Wahabi’s sister, Hana, who spoke to him on the night. “He said he had been told to stay inside, stay in one room together and put towels under the door. I told him to leave.” But he said there was too much smoke. “The last time I saw him they were waving out the window. The last time I spoke to his wife, he was on the phone to the fire brigade.”

Ali Yawar Jafari

His son, Hamid Ali Jafari, appealed on Twitter for information. He said the 82-year-old was living on the 10th floor of the building. He said his father had lost contact with his mother and sister who lived with him. “He was with my mother and sister in the lift and she said the lift stopped on the 10th floor and he said there was too much smoke and he couldn’t breathe and he got out of the lift and then the door shut and it didn’t stop again till the ground floor,” he told the Telegraph.

Mohamednur Tucca

He is missing along with his wife Amalahmedin and his three-year-old daughter after visiting relatives. His manager, Mike Morgan, chief executive of the Soho-based PR agency the Red Consultancy, told Sky News: “Mo is part of the family. He will have been with us for 10 years next month and is due to be awarded his decade milestone. We all just want to hear he is OK.”

Gloria Trevisan and Marco Gottardi

The young Italian couple recently moved into the 23rd floor of the block. “I don’t have news from them since last night and their mobile phones are off,” Gottardi’s cousin wrote on Facebook. “I’m praying to God they make it out safely.” Trevisan, 26, called her mother in Italy at roughly 3.30am to say their building was ablaze, according to the Italian newspaper Corriere del Veneto. They have not been heard from since.

Raymond “Moses” Bernard

A family friend told the Press Association that Raymond Bernard, 65, known to friends as Moses, was missing. He was registered at flat 201, along with Karen Bernard, 53. They had lived there since at least 2003.

Rania Ibrham

Believed to be the mother of two small children, aged three and five, the 30-year-old uploaded a Facebook Live video as she appeared to be stuck at the top of the tower block, and has not been heard from by friends since. In the footage, she can be seen seeking help in the smoke-filled corridor before going back into her home and looking down on the street below from her balcony. Her husband was reportedly not at home because he is on holiday.

Hesham Rahman

Noha Baghdady shared a picture of her brother Hesham Rahman, 57, on social media, saying he lived on the 20th floor. His nephews were searching hospitals. Sky News reported that his last contact with family was at around 3am when he told them he could smell smoke. He reportedly has diabetes, making it difficult for him to walk down stairs.

Dennis Murphy

Stevan Racz shared a post seeking information about his uncle Dennis Murphy, who he said had called while trapped on the 14th floor of the building. “We haven’t heard anything since.”

Tony Disson

His son Lee Disson posted on Facebook to say: “If anyone has seen my dad, Tony Disson, could they let us know.” He is believed to have been living in flat 194. Another relative tweeted: “My cousin is desperate to trace his dad. Tony Disson. He lived on the 10th floor. We are hearing terrible news from neighbours.” The 66-year-old lived with his wife Cordelia.

Mohamed “Saber” Neda

A friend of Neda, Ariana Neumann Rodger, posted on Facebook that “his family are severely injured and in hospital and desperate to find out where he is”. Zia Popal, who described him as his uncle, posted: “He was on the top floor of the building trying to help [people] and went missing since.” He added that none of the hospitals had him registered.

Zainab Dean

Francis Dean, 47, said his sister Zainab had called him to say firefighters had instructed her to remain in her 14th-floor flat, with her two-year-old son Jeremiah. That was in the early hours of Wednesday. He said he feared the worst.

Sheila Smith

Adam Smith appealed for information about his 84-year-old mother, Sheila. She is believed to have been living at flat 132 in the building.

Nadia Choucair

Council records showed that Nadia and Malak Choucair were living in flat 193. Nadia, 33, worked as a nursery officer at the Avondale Park primary school. She is understood to have lived on one of the top floors with her husband, three daughters and mother-in-law. A resident, called Hulya, who lives close by told the Telegraph: “Nadia’s daughter rang a friend saying: ‘I don’t think I’m going to make it.’ It’s heartbreaking.”

Nura Jamel

Friends said she had contacted them from the building as the fire took hold. According to records, Jamel was living at flat 192. Hibo Yussuf, 35, a friend of the missing woman, told the Telegraph: “We’ve heard that Nura’s daughter is in hospital but hasn’t been able to get hold of her mum. Nura called one of her friends to say: ‘Forgive me, the fire is here, I’m dying.’”