Edward Daffarn says council should restore services of library, college and stables as atonement for years of neglect

The man who said it would take a “catastrophic” fire in Grenfell Tower before council officials would act on safety concerns has demanded that community assets are returned to residents as reparation for the disaster.



Edward Daffarn, the key author of the Grenfell Action Group blog which detailed the management failures and fire safety problems at the block for five years before the fire, said the move would be a necessary corrective for decades of neglect by the Kensington and Chelsea council.



He called for the council to reverse the leasing of North Kensington library to a private school, to preserve the threatened local adult education college, and to reopen stables where riding lessons were, until recently, available for children with disabilities.

Soon after Daffarn spoke to the Guardian, the council provided the written confirmation he had sought that the library’s future would be secured. But he is still calling for a reversal of the decisions on the other community sites.

Grenfell Tower priest tells of community's anger and grief in poem Read more

“Reparation is a difficult word because nothing can make good for what happened that evening, but some change has to come; it can’t be business as usual,” Daffarn said.



Speaking at length for the first time since the fire, which killed at least 80 people in June, he argued that a council-led drive to regenerate North Kensington was behind both the neglect of Grenfell residents and the planned closures of the community services. As such, he said, the services should be returned to the community as a show of official atonement by the council.

Daffarn, a former social worker, has been a persistent and meticulous critic of the council and the Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation since 2010. He documented the failures of both bodies to respond to repeated concerns about fire safety in the tower, while charting the council’s drive to regenerate North Kensington for new, richer residents.

Last November, his blog warned that only a “serious loss of life of KCTMO residents” would get people to pay attention to what was happening at Grenfell and predicted that in the event of a fire, the blog would become “part of damning evidence of the poor safety record of the KCTMO”.



Facebook Twitter Pinterest Grenfell Tower after the fire. Photograph: Rick Findler/PA

Since the disaster, police have interviewed Daffarn at length, and taken copies of the blog and all his correspondence with the council and estate management officials.

He said he was not ready to talk about the tower and his repeated warnings about safety failings, but he wanted to try to draw something constructive from the devastation by campaigning for reparations and highlighting the council’s misplaced focus on development in the area.

“They didn’t give a stuff about us. We were the carcass and they were the vultures,” he said. “North Kensington was like a goldmine, only they didn’t have to dig for the gold. All they had to do was to marginalise the people who were living here, and that’s what they were doing.”

He said he believed council officials were preoccupied by redevelopment, giving them less time to focus on their responsibilities towards tenants. “Grenfell wouldn’t have happened if they had spent their time looking after us, doing their job properly,” he said.

“These things are linked. The things that were precious and mattered to this community were not respected and weren’t protected.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Kensington and Chelsea College. The building is threatened with demolition, to be replaced by a private housing development. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian

The library and the college, like the borough’s council estates, “were seen as assets that could be taken away, or mistreated or not looked after properly”, he said. “Are we going to allow them to go on closing down the things that are valuable? Our college, our library, our stables? We can’t lose everything we have been fighting for to the same institution.”

Before the fire, the North Kensington library was about to be leased to the private Notting Hill preparatory school next door. Acquiring the building, opened in 1895 as an educational resource for the children of the poor, would have allowed the prep school to expand, and the council planned to build a smaller library nearby.

“This beautiful building has been used by generation and generation of working class people,” Daffarn said. “It has served the community for 125 years and it is part of the culture and heritage of North Kensington.”

Two weeks ago, Daffarn and fellow campaigners had a verbal assurance from the council’s deputy leader that the library would remain in place. The council finally confirmed that in writing on Tuesday.

“We never would have got the library back had it not been for Grenfell. It is bittersweet. It has come at the cost of the Grenfell deaths,” he said.

Councillor Kim Taylor-Smith, deputy leader of Kensington and Chelsea council, told the Guardian: “Kensington and Chelsea council has committed to working closely with the community to help those affected by this tragedy.

All the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire named so far Read more

“We will be involving Grenfell community groups and wider community on decisions involving local services and making sure their voices are heard. I have been discussing the future of North Kensington library with residents and I can reassure them that I have heard loud and clear how much the community values it. The library will be retained as a library.”

The future of Kensington and Chelsea college remains uncertain; the building is threatened with demolition, to be replaced by a private housing development. Staff at the college believe there has been a process of managed decline in the past five years.

Plans to merge Kensington and Chelsea adult education college with West London college are under way, and the local building is threatened with demolition, to be replaced by a private housing development. Staff at the college believe there has been a process of managed decline in the past five years. “The community cannot afford to lose the college,” Daffarn said.



Facebook Twitter Pinterest The stables beneath Westway where, until recently, riding lessons were available for children with disabilities. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian

The West London stables, located beneath a motorway, are closed, pending redevelopment of the area.



Daffarn said: “It was a jewel in our crown beneath the motorway … If you didn’t have money it didn’t matter; you would still be accommodated.



“The transfer of these assets from public into private has been a very vicious attack on everything we hold dear.”

The fire left Daffarn so traumatised that he has mostly avoided the media since. He fled through thick smoke from his 16th floor flat and was found on a landing by a firefighter who pulled at his leg in the darkness to show the way to the stairs. Many of his friends were among those who died.



He said he wanted the demands, which reflect long, bitterly fought and largely ignored local campaigns, to help reverse the rapid transformation of the area, which he regarded as being almost entirely unhelpful for the community.



He said he also hoped the inquiry, which starts on Thursday, would help bring long-lasting changes “so that people who live in council estates are never treated again as they were previously: with indifference and neglect”.