Share this article with Google Plus

Smoke billows from Grenfell Tower as firefighters attempt to control it (Picture: AFP PHOTO / Daniel LEAL-OLIVASDANIEL LEAL-OLIVAS/AFP/Getty Images)

Controversial cladding was added to Grenfell Tower in part to improve the view for nearby luxury flats.

According to planning documents for the tower block, which were seen in the wake of the devastating blaze, the cladding was partly designed to improve the building’s appearance for wealthier neighbours.

Man moves into his dream home and finds 'more than 150 problems' on day one

Grenfell Tower was built in 1974 and housed low-income families in Latimer Road, North Kensington.

When it was refurbished, at a cost of £8.6m, plastic cladding was installed on the outside of the building.

Planning documents said the appearance of the high-rise building – which is visible across the borough – should be improved.

Cladding was added to make it look nicer to richer neighbours (Picture: AFP PHOTO / Adrian DENNISADRIAN DENNIS/AFP/Getty Images)

It read: ‘The changes to the existing tower will improve its appearance especially when viewed from the surrounding area.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

The document makes repeated reference to the ‘appearance of the area’, according to the Independent.

Siblings report own parents to police after being 'made to watch Isis beheading video'

It has now been suggested that the added cladding exacerbated the spread of the flames which have killed at least 12 people.

Arnold Tarling, from property company Hindwoods, said cladding creates 25mm-30mm cavities between the buildings insulation.

‘It produces a wind tunnel and also traps any burning material between the rain cladding and the building,’ he said.

The refurbishment cost more than £8m (Picture: SilverHub/REX/Shutterstock)

Rydon, the construction firm who refurbished the building, have said their work met ‘all required building control, fire regulation, and health and safety standards.’

‘If the cladding was partly responsible for the fire we need to know what the specification for the cladding was and why it suddenly just went up (in flames) in about five minutes because it should have been fire resistant, surely,’ councillor Judith Blakeman told the Independent.

Metro.co.uk have made repeated attempts to contact Rydon.

Tower blocks across the country which underwent similar refurbishment programmes will now be examined for fire safety issues.