Principal’s Welcome Spring 2018 I am delighted to welcome you to the Kensington Aldridge Academy (KAA) website. As you will see, KAA is a growing 11 – 18 academy situated in the heart of North Kensington. We opened in brand new buildings in 2014 and our facilities are second to none. We currently have 960 students in total; 720 in Years 7, 8, 9 & 10 and 240 in Year 12 & 13. Next year we will be a full school with all seven year groups.

KAA is a school which has the very highest standards – both in terms of academic teaching and life beyond the classroom. In our first year the Department of Education reported we are “one of the best new academies they had ever seen” in terms of our planning and curriculum. In 2017, Ofsted have judged us to be “outstanding” in all areas and described standards as “exceptional”. Students and parents who are considering KAA, or teachers who are interested in working with us, can read our Ofsted report here.

Our Sixth Form is also outstanding and is operated jointly with our independent school partners Charterhouse and Godolphin & Latymer. It offers sixth formers an experience that is totally unique in the state sector. Our first set of results indicate we are in the top 10% of schools national in terms of the progress students make from GCSE to A-Level. This year we have three students with Oxbridge offers and next year we expect even more. Any current Year 11 students interested in applying to study with us in September should visit our Sixth Form pages.

We hope that if you click around our website you will be able to find any information you need. We have included details of our curriculum, information about our partners Godolphin & Latymer, Charterhouse, LAMDA and RAD, recent videos and news stories showcasing the many achievements of our fantastic students, our prospectus and Sixth Form prospectus, any current staff vacancies and details of all other elements of life at KAA. Prospective parents and students should visit our admissions pages for details of how to apply.

With best wishes,

David Benson

Principal