UPDATE 10.55am: Sadiq Khan has released a full statement following the Grenfell Tower block fire in north Kensington. The "devastated" London Mayor has sent his condolences to those who have been affected, and thanked "our incredible firefighters and emergency services for their immense courage, dedication and professionalism".

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

I'm truly devastated to see the horrific scenes of the major fire at #GrenfellTower in #Kensington. My statement: https://t.co/cVKB8L6IyW pic.twitter.com/mlPngrmy8T — Sadiq Khan (@SadiqKhan) June 14, 2017

Khan also confirmed several fatalities, and said that while 50 people are currently being treated in hospital, the "fire service is dealing with a rapidly changing situation and these numbers are likely to rise".

He concluded that there will be "a great many questions over the coming days as to the cause of this tragedy" and reassured Londoners that "we will get all the answers".

The last part of Khan's statement was in response to claims that Grenfell Tower residents were advised to remain in their flats in the event of a fire.

ORIGINAL STORY 8.30am: Sadiq Khan has condemned the "bad advice" given to the occupants of the Latimer road tower block, which became engulfed in flames in the early hours of this morning.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

A 2014 newsletter recommended a "stay put" policy because the tower block had been designed to "rigorous fire safety standards" (via The Independent).

Khan added: "Thankfully residents didn't take that advice but fled... these are some of the questions that have to be answered.

DANIEL LEAL-OLIVAS/AFP/Getty Images

"We have lots of people in London living in tower blocks... We can't have peoples lives being put at risk because of bad advice or lack of maintenance."

Several people have died in the fire, and 50 people are being treated in hospital, London Ambulance have confirmed.

More than 100 medics are responding to #GrenfellTower #NorthKensington & we have taken over 50 patients to hospital https://t.co/5IZS0JeRW3 pic.twitter.com/unp2KmwS1i — London Ambulance (@Ldn_Ambulance) June 14, 2017

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

London Fire Commissioner Dany Cotton said there had been "a number of fatalities", but could not say how many due to the "size and complexity" of the building (via the BBC).

Earlier today, Khan declared the blaze "a major incident", tweeting: "Major incident declared at Grenfell Tower in Kensington. 40 fire engines & 200 firefighters at the scene - follow @LondonFire for updates."

Meanwhile, the Metropolitan Police have set up an emergency number for anyone concerned about friends or family members. That number is 0800 0961 233.

The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea have said that an emergency rest centre is open for evacuees at the Harrow Centre, Freston Road.

...