The design of Grenfell Tower might have helped the deadly fire that ripped through it spread, according to experts.

The building was covered in cladding that spread the fire quickly up the entire 24-storey building, according to architects and firefighters.

"The cladding was clearly spreading the fire," said Mike Penning, a Conservative MP who worked as a firefighter and then fire minister. "We need to find out what went on."

Grenfell tower fire







42 show all Grenfell tower fire

















































































1/42 Local residents watch as Grenfell Tower is engulfed by fire Getty Images

2/42 London Fire Brigade said there has been a number of fatalities from the blaze Rex Features

3/42 The fire was first reported in the early hours of Wednesday and continued into the morning Rex Features

4/42 A local resident sees the fire over the rooftops @Ebajgora

5/42 A firefighter reacts at the scene of the blaze Getty Images

6/42 Residents watch as the blaze continues Getty Images

7/42 More than 200 firefighters have been fighting the blaze PA

8/42 London Mayor Sadiq Khan has declared the fire a major incident Getty Images

9/42 Police and fire services attempted to evacuate the concrete block of flats Getty Images

10/42 A woman runs to assist paramedics working at the fire at the Grenfell Tower Getty Images

11/42 Smoke rises from the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 story Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London in the early hours of Wednesday morning Getty Images

12/42 Fire fighters tackle the 24-storey building in West London Getty Images

13/42 Ambulances are stationed nearby Getty Images

14/42 Paramedics arrive with oxygen Getty Images

15/42 Emergency services believe it will take some time to establish the cause of the fire

16/42 Tens of people have been taken to five different hospitals across London Getty Images

17/42 A man comforts a boy after the tower block was severely damaged Reuters

18/42 Firefighters stand amid debris in a childrens playground nearby Reuters

19/42 Firefighters are stationed at the building Getty Images

20/42 Smoke engulfs Grenfell tower Rex Features

21/42 Lots of people donating water, food and clothing to St Clement's church for the residents of Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road Samuel Osborne

22/42 A man speaks to a fire fighter after a huge fire engulfed the 24 story Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

23/42 According to the London Fire Brigade (LFB), 40 fire engines and 200 firefighters are working to put out the blaze. Residents in the tower were evacuated and a number of people were treated for a range of injuries EPA

24/42 A resident of Grenfell Tower is trapped as smoke billows from the window after a fire engulfed the building Getty Images

25/42 Members of the emergency services work at the scene of a huge blaze which engulfed Grenfell Tower, a residential tower block in Latimer Road Getty Images

26/42 According to the London Fire Brigade (LFB), 40 fire engines and 200 firefighters are working to put out the blaze EPA

27/42 Fire fighters tackle the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 story Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

28/42 The burnt facade of Grenfell Tower, the night after the fire in Latimer Road, West London REUTERS/Neil Hall

29/42 Local residents gather at a community centre near Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road REUTERS/Toby Melville

30/42 A resident in a nearby building watches smoke rise from Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London AP

31/42 Police and rescue services operate near the fire at Grenfell Tower, a 24-storey apartment block in Latimer Road EPA

32/42 A man stands amid debris on the A40 after a serious fire in a tower block at Latimer Road in West London REUTERS/Toby Melville

33/42 A view of the empty A40 highway after it was closed in both directions, due to the proximity of the fire at Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road EPA

34/42 Smoke rises from the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

35/42 Bodies are removed from the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Rick Findler/PA Wire

36/42 Bodies are removed from the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Rick Findler/PA Wire

37/42 Provisions on tables at the Westway Sports Centre close to the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Jack Hardy/PA

38/42 Beds are laid out in the Westway Sports Centre close to the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Jack Hardy/PA Wire

39/42 A pile of donated clothes, sleeping bags and water lie next to a police cordon near the burning the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

40/42 Signs asking for donations are seen outside the Notting Hill methodist Chruch Getty Images

41/42 Smoke rises from the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

42/42 A man is rescued by fire fighters after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty

The kind of rainscreen cladding used on the outside of the building has cavities inside of it which can work as chimney – carrying the fire up the building. It seems to have been added last year, as part of refurbishment work.

Residents agreed that the material on the outside of the building appeared to be allowing it to spread up the outside. They suggested it had been added in part to make the housing block look better from the outside, as part of a regeneration plan linked to the building of luxury flats nearby.

Paul Mennacer, who lived on the seventh floor of Grenfell Tower, said: "I got woken up by people screaming, saying 'Don't jump'. There was black smoke coming at me and my instinct told me 'Just grab your shoes and run out'.

"It was hard to get out because the fire exit stairwell was on the side of the fire and so there was a lot of debris falling.

"It was the cladding that was on fire and that's what was burning, people believe that it was the cladding."

Journalist Jack Monroe, who worked in the fire service, tweeted that "Whoever signed off on that cladding needs to be hauled before a court and held fully accountable for every single fatality and injury".

Some residents and experts also suggested that the renovation work may have used non-flammable cladding. That is cheaper to install but can create a fire risk.

Chartered surveyor and fire expert Arnold Tarling, from Hindwoods, said that the process can create a 25mm-30mm cavity between the cladding and the insulation.

"It produces a wind tunnel and also traps any burning material between the rain cladding and the building.

"So had it been insulated per se, the insulation could fall off and fall away from the building, but this is all contained inside."

He said not all insulation used in the process is the more expensive non-flammable type.

"So basically you have got a cavity with a fire spreading behind it."

London fire: What we know so far

Angus Law, of the BRE Centre for Fire Safety Engineering at the University of Edinburgh, said: "Early media reports suggest that this event has similarities with other fires that have occurred recently around the world."

He added: "The UK's regulatory framework for tall residential buildings is intended to prevent the spread of fire between floors and between apartments.

"If spread of fire does occur, as has happened at Grenfell Tower, the consequences are often catastrophic."

If the cladding was indeed to blame for spreading the fire, it would explain why the damage was so universally spread over the outside of the building. It would also lead to questions about how the building was built and renovated.

The firm that provided the cladding for the Grenfell estate was Harley Curtain Wall, according to the Architects Journal. That firm went into administration two years ago.

Rydon Construction, which refurbished the building in works that finished last year, said that it was confident that the construction was up to standards. It said it was "shocked to hear of the devastating fire" but that all the work "met all required building control, fire regulation and health & safety standards".

The building was refurbished recently at a cost of £8.6 million, with work completed in May last year.

The exterior of the tower was modernised with cladding and replacement windows, while additional homes were added using vacant space in the building.

On its website, Rydon Construction said: "Externally, rain screen cladding, curtain wall facade and replacement windows were fitted, improving thermal insulation and modernising the exterior of the building."

The work also included the installation of new double-glazed windows and a new communal heating system.

A communal entrance was also created along with new facilities for returning tenants, Grenfell Under 3s Nursery and Dale Youth Amateur Boxing Club.

Based in the borough of Kensington and Chelsea, it is around half a mile from the Westfield shopping centre and close to many London Underground stations.

Additional reporting by agencies