Share this article with Google Plus

Nicholas Paget-Brown has resigned (Picture: BBC)

The leader of Kensington and Chelsea Council has resigned over the authority’s response to the Grenfell Tower disaster.

Nicholas Paget-Brown has stepped down from his role as leader of the Conservative council.

Man moves into his dream home and finds 'more than 150 problems' on day one

The announcement came a day after he apologised for the council’s response to the fire, in which at least 80 people were killed.

Speaking at a council meeting, Mr Paget-Brown then dramatically halted proceedings because the presence of journalists at the meeting would ‘prejudice’ the forthcoming public inquiry, he said.

Resigning on Friday, he said: ‘This council has also been criticised for failing to answer all the questions that people have. That is properly a matter for the public inquiry.

Sorry, this video is no longer available.

‘As council leader, I have to accept my share of responsibility for these perceived failings. In particular, my decision to accept legal advice that I should not compromise the public inquiry by having an open discussion in public yesterday, has itself become a political story.

Advertisement

Advertisement

‘It cannot be the right that this should become the focus of attention when so many are dead or still unaccounted for.

Siblings report own parents to police after being 'made to watch Isis beheading video'

‘I have therefore decided to step down as leader of the council as soon as a successor is in place.’

He has faced calls to resign both from within and outside the council.

Deputy leader Rock Feilding-Mellen also resigned, adding he would co-operate with the inquiry into the disaster.

Sorry, this video is no longer available.

Mayor of London Sadiq Khan has written to Theresa May requesting that commissioners are appointed to take over the running of the council.

In a statement, he said: ‘I welcome Nick Paget-Brown’s announcement that he intends to resign as leader of Kensington and Chelsea council.

‘The council now needs to find a way to move forward and find a way to restore the confidence in that community.

‘That can only be done with new leadership and a new approach that reaches out to residents who quite rightly feel desperately neglected.’