Just 26 of 203 Grenfell families are living in permanent homes (Picture; Rick Findler/PA Wire)

Most families who lost their homes in the Grenfell Tower have still not been rehomed, the Government has admitted.

Housing minister Alok Sharma, 50, said that by the end of October just 26 of the 203 households who had lived in the tower and on Grenfell Walk now had permanent accommodation.

Labour MP David Lammy uncovered the figures. He said: ‘Five months on from the Grenfell Tower fire we are seeing an abject failure by the state to support the survivors of this tragedy.

Man moves into his dream home and finds 'more than 150 problems' on day one

‘It is nothing short of a disgrace that 130 households are still living in emergency accommodation in bed and breakfasts.

‘These families have been failed by the state time and time again and it should be a source of shame for the Government and the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea (RBKC).’

Advertisement

Advertisement

It was revealed that more than half of the victims were living in emergency accommodation, while 47 were living in temporary homes, following the blaze on June 14.

The numbers were revealed in response to a parliamentary question made by Labour MP David Lammy (Picture; R Stefan Rousseau/PA Wire)

At least 80 were killed in the fire, including Mr Lammy’s friend Khadija Saye, a 24-year-old photographer.

Mr Lammy said it was ‘totally unacceptable’ that only one in eight families have been permanently rehoused and that RBKC and the Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) were ‘unfit for purpose’.

‘The information I am picking up from people working on the ground, together with the fact that only around a quarter of households have accepted permanent accommodation, clearly tells us that the council is moving far too slowly and that when offers are being made they are being turned down because they are unsuitable or away from workplaces, schools and support networks in North Kensington.’

The housing minister responded: ‘The RBKC is working urgently to move all families affected by the Grenfell tragedy into temporary or settled accommodation at the earliest opportunity. The DCLG is working to support the council in achieving this.

‘For each family, we will respect their wishes and give them the time and space to make this transition at their own pace, and in a way that best supports them to recover from this tragedy.’

Mr Lammy also asked how many of the children who previously lived in Grenfell Tower were living in hotels, but the housing minister did not reveal the number.

Instead, Mr Sharma said more families are set to move into permanent homes as 61 have accepted offers of new accommodations.

Housing minister Alok Sharma said residents would get new homes within a year of the fire (Picture; Ken McKay/ITV/REX/Shutterstock)

He also revealed that a total of 54 households have accepted offers of temporary homes, meaning those living in emergency accommodation should fall.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Mr Sharma said DCLG and RBKC were working to ensure residents of Grenfell Tower and Walk are provided new homes in social housing within a year of the June fire.

‘London local authorities and housing associations have been proactive in offering accommodation and help to assist. However, it is important to get this right and ensure survivors have choice over their housing options,’ he added.

In June, Theresa May pledged to rehouse the Grenfell Tower victims in three weeks as she launched a £5million fund to help them.