A huge fire has engulfed Grenfell Tower in West London, which has led to a number of fatalities

AT least 12 people have died, with the death toll expected to rise, after a fire ripped through an apartment block in London, injuring 74 people.

Scores more are feared dead as families on the upper floors were trapped by the raging inferno, forcing some to leap out of windows to escape the horror.

The blaze engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower, on the Lancaster West Estate near White City, just before 1am Wednesday (10am Wednesday AEST).

The cause of the fire is under investigation, but one witness said it was started by his neighbour’s fridge exploding on the fourth floor.

NHS England said 74 people are being treated in six hospitals across the capital, of whom 20 are in critical care. Commander Stuart Cundy from Metropolitan Police said he expects the death toll to increase.

London Mayor Sadiq Khan said the fire had been declared a “major incident” and there would be a “great many questions” asked over the coming days.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is working to confirm whether any Australians have been affected.

photo gallery Dramatic pictures: Inferno at Grenfell Tower Dramatic pictures of the massive blaze at an apartment tower in central London, where people have died. Picture: Guilhem Baker/LNP Smoke rises from the apartment building in west London on Wednesday, June 14, 2017. Metropolitan Police are continuing to evacuate people from the tower. The fire has been burning for more than three hours and stretches from the second to the 27th floor of the building. Picture: AP Photo/Matt Dunham Police and firefighters were called at 1.16am to reports the large fire at a block of flats in the Lancaster West Estate, W11. About 200 firefighters were soon tackling the blaze. Picture: Jamie Lorriman/The Sun Firefighters resting in the morning after hours spent fighting the fire in Grenfell Tower. Picture: Guilhem Baker/LNP A handout image given to local resident Natalie Oxford early on June 14 showing flames and smoke coming from the 27-storey apartment block, which has 120 flats. Picture: AFP Photo/Natalie Oxford People being treated for smoke inhalation near the scene of the fire. Picture: Guilhem Baker/LNP The fire fully engulfed upper storeys of the Grenfell Tower. Picture: Jamie Lorriman/The Sun Firefighters tackling the huge blaze on the morning of June 14, as the London Mayor Sadiq Khan declares the fire a major incident. Picture: Leon Neal/Getty Images An emotional firefighter at the site of the huge fire engulfing the Grenfell Tower in west London early on June 14, 2017. Picture: AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas A resident peers out of a window of the Grenfell Tower. Picture: AP/Matt Dunham A person (bottom right) at a window of the building, as Metropolitan Police evacuate people from the tower. Picture: AP Photo/Matt Dunham Flames and smoke billow from the Grenfell Tower block. Picture: Reuters/Toby Melville Firefighters wait to start their shift during the massive operation to fight the fire in the 27-storey high-rise apartment building. Picture: AP/Matt Dunham The large billow of smoke from the fire is widely visible on the London skyline. Picture: Reuters/Toby Melville Police enforce a security cordon around the Grenfell Tower as firefighters battle the huge blaze and emergency services treat “a number of people for a range of injuries”, including smoke inhalation. Picture: AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas Smoke billowing from the Grenfell Tower early on June 14, 2017. Picture: Rick Findler/PA via AP Locals watch as Grenfell Tower is engulfed by the fire, trapping an unknown number of residents. Picture: AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas A handout image given to local resident Natalie Oxford early on June 14, 2017 shows flames and smoke coming from a 27-storey block of flats after a fire broke out in west London. The fire brigade said 40 fire engines and 200 firefighters had been called to the blaze in Grenfell Tower, which has 120 flats. Picture: AFP PHOTO/Natalie Oxford A resident of a nearby council estate watches smoke billowing from Grenfell Tower on June 14. Picture: AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas Fire still burns and smoke rises from the thoroughly burnt upper storeys of the Grenfell Tower. Picture: Leon Neal/Getty Images Ambulances stationed near the huge fire engulfing the Grenfell Tower early June 14, 2017 in west London. Picture:AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas Firefighters direct water at the blaze. Picture: Reuters/Toby Melville Emergency service workers at the scene of a huge fire in Grenfell Tower. Picture: AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas Local residents watch in horror as Grenfell Tower is engulfed by fire. Picture: AFP Photo/Daniel Leal-Olivas Emergency service responders and locals gather at a cordon near the site of the massive fire. Picture: Rick Findler/PA via AP Flames and smoke coming from a 27-storey block of flats which is fully alight. The fire brigade said 40 fire engines and 200 firefighters battled the blaze. Picture: AFP Photo/Natalie Oxford Firefighters and emergency service workers assemble near the Grenfell Tower. Picture: Leon Neal/Getty Images A resident in a nearby building watches smoke rise from the Grenfell Tower. Picture: AP Photo/Matt Dunham 1 of 28 HIDE THUMBS

Amid the horror, there were also signs of hope. ITV correspondent Jonathan Swain tweeted that firefighters had found survivors even nine hours after the fire began.

The Sun quoted witnesses who said the building went up in 15 minutes. In the wake of the blaze, other onlookers reported that the building seemed to be “lurching to one side”, the paper reported.

London’s Fire Brigade said a structural engineer and urban search and rescue crews assessed the stability of the tower block and believed it was not in danger of collapsing. The brigade said “it is safe for our crews to be in there.”

EERIE WARNING: ‘It’s a recipe for disaster’

SUPPORT: Celebs offer ‘bed and tea’ after fire

There were distressing scenes at one of the roadblocks on Latimer Road in west London where terrified residents were seeking information about their families.

One woman screamed and was supported by another woman as she collapsed on the road.

The crowd called out to authorities for information and police compiled a list of names of those evacuated and any residents still missing. There are 120 units in the building.

Nick Paget-Brown, the leader of Kensington and Chelsea Borough, said “several hundred” people would have been in the block when the fire broke out. A “significant number of people” remain unaccounted for.

RELATED: Heroes of London’s fire tragedy

INFERNO: How the London blaze unfolded

More than 200 firefighters, 45 fire engines and 20 ambulances rushed to the scene, with firefighters tackling the massive blaze amid reports desperate residents had to build ropes from sheets to escape the inferno.

Forty-five fire engines were called to the scene at just after 1.15am local time (10.15 AEST).

Police set up a triage centre at the Garden Bar and Grill on Latimer Road and escorted residents, many wearing oxygen masks, inside for medical aid.

One man who was taken to the triage centre spotted a relative in the crowd and rushed to the police tape, weeping as he held his arm and asking repeatedly, “Why, why?”

A woman collapsed screaming in the roadway, where she was assisted by another woman and paramedics.

Resident Yasmin, who lives in one of the low-rise flats next to Grenfell, was woken by loud screaming and ran out on to her balcony to find the tower ablaze.

“I heard screams, I heard a guy calling for help,” she said.

“We didn’t know what to do. It was horrible. After about an hour they (the police) told us to get out. They evacuated us,” she said.

Yasmin and her family, including four cats, waited at the roadblock near the Latimer Road underground station waiting for permission to return.

Horrifying reports suggest nobody who lived on the top three residential floors survived.

A local community leader said they are working with a missing list of “possibly hundreds” of residents, but that nobody who lived on the 21st residential floor or above survived.

The committee member, who asked not to be named, told The Sun: “I have been told that anyone past the 21st floor did not make it. The firefighters told them to stay where they were.

“There is a family of three who live quite high up, a heavily pregnant wife, husband and two little girls aged ten and 11.”

Police under riot shields rescue man covered in ash from #GrenfellTower fire https://t.co/3SpyNs5cBO pic.twitter.com/lbt3sioubz — Evening Standard (@standardnews) June 14, 2017

RESIDENTS TELL OF HORROR

“In my 29 years of being a firefighter, I have never ever seen anything of this scale,” London Fire Brigade Commissioner Dany Cotton told reporters.

Hanan Wahabi, 39, told AFP she escaped with her husband and son, 16, and daughter, 8, but feared for her brother and his family who live on the 21st floor.

“Last time I saw him they were waving out the window, his wife and children,” she said, sitting outside the Rugby Portobello community centre.

“I’ve not heard from them since, the phone is not going through, the landline isn’t going through. That was about 2am.”

Eddie, 55, who lives on the 16th floor, said he ran out of his house with a wet towel wrapped around his head as smoke engulfed the flat.

“You couldn’t see anything. I just ran down the stairs ... Loads of people haven’t got out of the building,” he said.

Resident Michael Paramasivan, 37, told The Sun he ran down six flights of stairs clinging to his five-year-daughter as the fire.

“I grabbed my dressing gown and woke the missus up, grabbed my daughter and stuck her under my dressing gown so she wouldn’t breathe in the smoke.

“We then just ran for our lives, we had to run down through the fourth floor where the fire was. There was so much smoke. It was crazy, it was just spreading so fast it was like it had been covered in petrol it was going so quickly.

“By the time we got out of the flat it was completely up, in a matter of minutes. Everyone was running for their lives.”

A witness says she saw a member of the public catch a baby that was dropped from the burning tower block in west London.

Samira Lamrani told Britain’s Press Association she saw a woman try to save the baby by dropping it from a window “on the ninth or 10th floor.”

She said: “People were starting to appear at the windows, frantically banging and screaming. The windows were slightly ajar, a woman was gesturing that she was about to throw her baby and if somebody could catch her baby. Somebody did, a gentleman ran forward and managed to grab the baby.”

This man lives inside #GrenfellTower, which caught fire overnight. He rescued a little girl from the west London tower block pic.twitter.com/TPBUJTXDGz — Sky News (@SkyNews) June 14, 2017

‘DO NOT WAIT FOR THE FIRE BRIGADE’

Fire authorities told shocked onlookers that any residents trapped inside the building needed to “self-evacuate”.

Metropolitan Police addressed a crowd at 4.14am (1.14pm AEST), yelling at them: “Listen to me ... listen ... if you know people inside, tell them to self evacuate ... do not wait for the fire brigade. If you get a phone call or twitter tell them, you tell them, to get out now.”

Police then told the crowd to tell their friends and family to put a wet tea towel over their face, get beneath the smoke and get out.

We have taken 30 patients to five London hospitals following the fire at #GrenfellTower & we remain on scene pic.twitter.com/lxfRseAIkg — London Ambulance (@Ldn_Ambulance) June 14, 2017

One woman yelled back her friends were on the 23rd floor: “Do you want them to jump out the window?”

Social media pictures from the scene showed one side of the tall block of flats engulfed in flames, before most of the building was consumed.

The cause of the fire has not yet been determined, however it’s been suggested it may have been sparked by an exploding electrical appliance.

‘IT’S A RECIPE FOR DISASTER’

The block, which is located beside Kensington Aldridge Academy school contains 120 units. It was built in 1974.

The tower block was recently given a major £10m (AU$17 million) refurbishment which took two years and was finished in May last year.

According to a media release at the time improvements included “the installation of insulated exterior cladding, new double glazed windows and a new communal heating system.

“All of this will greatly enhance the energy efficiency of the tower and help reduce residents’ living costs.”

Residents voiced concerns about fire safety and inadequate evacuation procedures for years, it has emerged.

An action group that was established to fight back against alleged lax safety also revealed Grenfell Tower occupants were issued flawed formal advice to occupants to “remain in their flats in the event of a fire”.

RESIDENTS ‘JUMPED FROM BUILDING’

Nobody would have been able to escape above the third floor of a burning London council 24-storey apartment block, a witness has told the BBC.

“I have watched one person falling out, I watched another woman holding her baby out the window on the — also on the west side of the building hearing screams. People screaming,” Jody Martin said.



Another woman who was trapped in the building live tweeted her experience as she tried to escape.

I'm stuck in this block!!! Can't leave my house because I'll die from the smoke https://t.co/CGSy2dgKCb — - (@rsrzy_) June 14, 2017

panicking because people are jumping out the window and I can't leave my house at all — - (@rsrzy_) June 14, 2017

She later posted another tweet saying she was safe.

Ayyub Asif, whose family lives in the building, told CNN he saw residents jumping out of the building.

“My nephew was in there, my cousin was in there,” he said, adding that he helped rescue workers carry people out of the building, including his relatives, both of whom were rushed to hospital.

“I saw people jumping out the window, it’s crazy,” he said.

Another witness, Omar Choudry, also said he saw people leaping from floors near the middle of the building to escape the fire.

Major incident declared at Grenfell Tower in Kensington. 40 fire engines & 200 firefighters at the scene - follow @LondonFire for updates. — Sadiq Khan (@SadiqKhan) June 14, 2017

“I could clearly see there was someone jumping off,” he said, adding that the top of the building was “completely ablaze.”

“You could see (the fire) from very, very far. You can still see the smoke — anywhere in London, you can probably see the smoke,” he said.

BBC spoke to Sandra Ruiz, the aunt of a 12-year-old girl who was in the building when the fire broke out and hasn’t been heard from for several hours.

Jessica had phoned her mum twice, the last time at 1.39am. That final communication cut out midway through and her phone is no longer ringing, Ms Ruiz said.

“She was on the 20th floor, she was on her own,” she said.

Witnesses reported the blaze began on the fourth floor of the 120 unit block and they could see residents shouting and screaming from other floors shortly before formal fire brigade and police evacuations began.

Crews continue to work hard at tower block fire in #NorthKensington Fire is from 2nd to top floor of 27 storey building pic.twitter.com/lAwhZl6Jf3 — London Fire Brigade (@LondonFire) June 14, 2017

George Clarke, the presenter of Amazing Spaces, told Radio 5 Live: “I was in bed and heard ‘beep, beep, beep’ and thought, ‘I’ll get up and run downstairs as quickly as I could’. I thought it might be a car alarm outside and saw the glow through the windows.

“I’m getting covered in ash, that’s how bad it is. I’m 100 metres away and I’m absolutely covered in ash. It’s so heartbreaking, I’ve seen someone flashing their torches at the top level and they obviously can’t get out.

“The guys are doing an incredible job to try and get people out that building, but it’s truly awful.”

One witness reported people were trapped in the building.

“Fourth floor there was a fire in an apartment then it went to the fifth and the sixth, then it caught on the left, then it caught on the right then just went all the way around (building),” one witness said in a social media video post.

“You can see people are still in the building … big fat blocks are falling down on the fire brigade, crazy. It’s been going on for two or three hours. Chaos, chaos, so many people are still in there. So many fire brigade are trying to go in to save people. The fire is moving around the building as well … all my days … ”

In his lengthy post he used his camera phone to zoom into windows were people were screaming for help.