Maundy Thursday 7.30 pm Service with lovefeast and footwashing Friday 30th March 11 am Good Friday Service Easter Sunday 1st April 11 am Easter Sunday Communion Service The Grenfell Tower fire Thank you to everyone for their time, prayers, volunteering and donations since the dreadful Grenfell Tower fire.

Our response We are offering support to those affected by the fire and the wider community. The church is open for prayer and practical assistance between 9am and 7pm. So far we have distributed £26,000 directly to Grenfell families .





. We have collected many tonnes of used clothes and toiletries which we are currently processing.





which we are currently processing. Three tonnes of donated food has already been distributed.





has already been distributed. Most of our new clothes have already been distributed, though we do have a small stock of essential toiletries, new clothes and other items.





have already been distributed, though we do have a small stock of essential toiletries, new clothes and other items. We also have information on sources of further help .





. We host an overnight listening service run by Hestia and the NHS every night 10pm - 8am.





run by Hestia and the NHS every night 10pm - 8am. We have held prayer vigils and will continue to do so - please see this website or follow us on Facebook or Twitter for updates.





and will continue to do so - please see this website or follow us on Facebook or Twitter for updates. We have a book of condolence, and many flowers and other tributes have been left outside the church. Donations We have received many calls from those who wish to donate to the community of Grenfell Towers. Cash donations These can be made at the church, which is open 9 - 7 each day, and will go directly to families affected by the fire. Cheques and online donations These are made through the London District of the Methodist Church. Please be aware that whilst these donations are currently being sent to the families and emergency services affected by the fire, they may also be used to support wider church work in response to these events. Please either send us a cheque (address above right) noting on the back 'for Grenfell’, or make a direct payment as below:



Account Name: London District of the Methodist Church

Sort Code: 40-52-40

Account No: 00030154



Physical Donations of Goods



We have been inundated with physical donations of clothing and food – we have warmly welcomed these and they have been distributed. However we do not require further donations of goods.



240 Lancaster Road

Notting Hill

London W11 4AH



Tel: 0207 229 7728

Email admin@nottinghillmethodistchurch.org



Minister: The Revd Mike Long

Email: mike.long@methodist.org.uk www.facebook.com/NottingHillMethodistChurch



www.twitter.com/NHMethodist

Open 9am - 7pm daily Sunday Service: 11am



All are welcome