Theresa May was bundled into a car and driven off (Picture: PA)

Theresa May faced cries of ‘coward’, ‘murderer’ and ‘shame on you’ as she returned to Kensington to meet Grenfell Tower disaster victims.

The Prime Minister met the group of victims, residents, volunteers and community leaders at St Clement’s Church close to the scene of the horrific blaze shortly before 5pm.

Theresa May announces £5million fund for Grenfell Tower fire victims

There was a large police presence which had to hold back an angry crowd outside the church.

One woman wept saying it was because the Prime Minister declined to speak to anyone outside the meeting which lasted less than hour.

Police broke up a scuffle between members of the crowd as the Mrs May’s car drove off.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Theresa May didn't speak to the people waiting outside. She rushed into her car. Heated scenes #GrenfellTower pic.twitter.com/brovHikpOG — AssedBaig (@AssedBaig) June 16, 2017

Scuffles broke out as Theresa May left the church (Picture: PA)

There was a large police presence which had to hold back an angry crowd (Picture: PA)

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

In Kensington there have been protests outside council offices where they tried to storm the building and appeared to turn on someone in the street.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Protesters began covering their faces as the atmosphere appeared to get increasing ugly.

Protesters storm Kensington Town Hall to demand ‘justice’ for Grenfell Tower Fire

At one point some of the crowd chased a television cameraman down the street.

Police officers lined the door to the hall with some protesters still inside.

There were calls of ‘murderers’ and ‘we want justice now’.

Among the demands of some protesters was the rehousing within the borough of all those who lost their home and more information on the victims.

Earlier in the day Mrs May visited survivors in hospital, as allies defended her against claims that she was failing to engage with those affected by the tragedy.

Mrs May spent almost an hour speaking to patients and staff at London’s Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, a day after visiting the scene of the blaze in west London to talk to firefighters, police and other emergency workers.

In written statement issued after the meeting in Kensington Mrs May said: ‘The individual stories I heard this morning at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital were horrific. I spoke with people who ran from the fire in only the clothes they were wearing.

‘They have been left with nothing – no bank cards, no money, no means of caring for their children or relatives. One woman told me she had escaped in only her top and underwear.

‘The package of support I’m announcing today is to give the victims the immediate support they need to care for themselves and for loved ones. We will continue to look at what more needs to be done.

‘Everyone affected by this tragedy needs reassurance that the Government is there for them at this terrible time – and that is what I am determined to provide.’