WALK after dark past some of the immaculately maintained white stucco houses in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea and automatic security lights all click on at the same time: a sign that many of their owners are absent. A lot of these residences, which have an average price of £2m ($2.7m) and can reach ten times that, have foreign owners or belong to Britons with other homes. The glitz of one of London’s wealthiest boroughs features in “Made in Chelsea”, a TV series about the leisured lives of the brash, expensively heeled denizens of “K and C”.

But the borough, which stretches from rich enclaves in the south near the King’s Road to more mixed housing in the north near Grenfell Tower, the site of a horrific late-night fire on June 14th that killed at least 79 people, has revived memories of a much older yarn. “A Tale of Two Cities”, Charles Dickens’s 19th-century novel, charted the fates of the rich and poor in London and Paris before the French Revolution. These days, Emma Dent Coad, the recently elected Labour MP for Kensington, rails against “extreme gentrification” and highlights the divisions of wealth and opportunity in a way that Dickens himself might have recognised. “The poor are getting poorer,” she says. “Their income is dropping…there is no trickledown here.” And indeed, the area around Grenfell Tower is home to some of the poorest people in the country (see map).

Get our daily newsletter Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.













Income differentials in the borough are certainly startling. The average (mean) salary is £123,000 ($156,000), among the highest in Britain. But the median (the point which half the population is above and half below) is just £32,700 ($41,400). The gap between the two, one of the widest in the country, reflects the gulf between earnings at the very top and the very bottom. Since the Grenfell Tower blaze, worries over inequality in the borough have become more widespread than in the usual leftist campaign speeches. Ms Dent Coad reports that many previous Tory voters have told her that they too are concerned about widening social rifts.

Unlike the banlieues (suburbs) of Paris, London’s social housing has traditionally been woven into the fabric of the city. The blackened skeleton of Grenfell Tower now looks like an ugly scar in a landscape where cramped social housing sits but a few streets away from some of the grandest terraces in London. The northern part of the borough is a hotch-potch of neat streets and tower blocks, where recently arrived migrants are housed alongside low-earning Britons. The first death announced at Grenfell was of Mohammed Alhajali, a Syrian refugee.

A summer of discontent

Talk to those at the scene of the disaster and a recurrent theme is that this has been a summer of shocks. It began with the election on June 8th, which saw Ms Dent Coad overturn a large Tory majority. Previously “K and C” had ranked as an unbreachable Tory citadel and a byword for urbane Conservatism, represented by such prominent MPs as the late Alan Clark, a political diarist, and Michael Portillo, a former defence secretary. Yet Labour’s national surge combined with tactical voting by opponents of Brexit. The overall result was that Victoria Borwick, the sitting Tory MP and firm backer of Brexit, lost by 20 votes to Ms Dent Coad, after three recounts.

The fire and its death toll have made that drama seem a minor disruption. Jan Crowden, a volunteer worker, says the incident “told us what we’ve known for a long time: that the inequalities here are glaring and that many people simply did not want to know”. She cites Elgin Crescent, with its expensive delicatessens, and the paltry offerings in supermarkets close to the Grenfell Tower, as signs that “people live very close, but in different worlds. Their kids don’t go to the same schools and their parents would never meet if it weren’t for what is happening now.”

Not everyone thinks the caricature of heartless rich alongside forgotten poor is a fair one. Local people have rallied to help those affected by the fire, offering sleeping space, emergency food and welfare arrangements, as well as therapy and legal support (essential because the Conservative-run local council was heavily criticised for its response to the fire: its chief executive later resigned).

Joanne Cash, a barrister and former prospective Tory candidate who lives near Grenfell Tower, says the mood is of “real anger” about inept handling of the fire’s aftermath. But she insists the community is more closely woven than critics claim. “Yes, this is a place with rich and poor people, largely because house prices have risen so fast in the past two decades. But it isn’t really full of absentee oligarchs. People use the local leisure centre together; the Notting Hill carnival is rooted here. There has always been variety and diversity of people and that has been its strength.”

A cultural battle is now under way over the significance of the tragedy and the responses to it. A “day of rage” march by far- left protesters on June 21st linked calls for justice for the Grenfell victims with demands to overthrow the Tory government. But the local “Love Golborne” community website riposted that “Grenfell residents are totally opposed...(and) do not want their grief hijacked.”

Whatever else happens to the story as blame is apportioned, the tale of two cities in contemporary London retains painful resonances with the one Dickens wove into a tapestry of social discontent in London and Paris. One of his villains, the wealthy Marquis St Evrémonde, has his carriage driven recklessly, killing the child of a French peasant. He throws a coin to the child’s father to compensate him, but it is thrown back, unleashing a quest for vengeance and justice that spans the English Channel and links together previously separate characters. In the febrile mood of an apprehensive city after Grenfell, the echoes are hard to ignore.