They made repeated posts about fire safety (Picture: SWNS/grenfellactiongroup)

Grenfell Tower management were repeatedly warned about fire precautions, a residents’ group has claimed.

‘All our warnings fell on deaf ears and we predicted that a catastrophe like this was inevitable and just matter of time,’ Grenfell Action Group said after the fire broke out last night.

Six people have been confirmed dead with the toll expected to rise, but the campaigning group claim it could have been prevented.

In a blog raising social issues in the area, they criticised Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO) for alleged failings spanning years.

A blog post from November last year (Picture: Grenfell Action Group)

Sorry, this video is no longer available.

‘Regular readers of this blog will know that we have posted numerous warnings in recent years about the very poor fire safety standards at Grenfell Tower and elsewhere in the borough,’ they said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Some of the posts include:

KCTMO playing with fire

More on fire safety

Another fire safety scandal

KCTMO feeling the heat

Why are we waiting

Grenfell Tower from bad to worse

More trouble at Grenfell Tower

In a post dated November 2016, they wrote: ‘It is a truly terrifying thought but the Grenfell Action Group firmly believe that only a catastrophic event will expose the ineptitude and incompetence of our landlord.’

They claimed that ‘only an incident that results in serious loss of life will allow the external scrutiny to occur that will shine a light’ on the failings.

A post from 2013 claiming there was ‘negligence’ from management (Picture: Grenfell Action Group)

MORE: Neighbours shout to a man still visible in tower block window

‘It is our conviction that a serious fire in a tower block or similar high density residential property is the most likely reason that those who wield power at the KCTMO will be found out and brought to justice.’

They said there had been a ‘terrifying’ incident in May 2013 where a ‘near catastrophic and highly dangerous power surge destroyed many electrical appliances belonging to Grenfell Tower residents.’

Electrical appliances were catching fire and burning out due to the surge which was due to faulty wiring, they claimed.

They said there was a dangerous power surge in 2013 (Picture: Grenfell Action Group)

MORE: Grenfell Tower had just had an £8.7m refurb – but was new cladding to blame?

The group claimed access to the building was ‘severely restricted’ for emergency services and other vehicles and that residents were advised to stay in their flats in case of fire.

Some residents complained about the insulation cladding that had been put on the outside of the building during a refurbishment, which they said could help fire to spread.

Their most recent post on fire safety, just three months ago, echoed their previous concerns that there were ‘still no fire safety instructions on display’ in a number of other KCTMO tower blocks.

There have been fatalities, firefighters said (Picture: Rex)

MORE: Families desperately search for missing loved ones caught up in Grenfell Tower fire

Advertisement

Advertisement

They added: ‘There is no excuse for failure to post fire safety instructions in all multi-use blocks.

‘The phrase “an accident waiting to happen” springs readily to mind.’

Council leader Nick Paget-Brown said in a statement: ‘This is a terrible day for Kensington and Chelsea and we are doing all we can to support the victims and their families.”

‘At present all our focus has to be on supporting the rescue and relief operation. But the cause of the fire will need to be fully investigated and we will keep people informed.’