Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Police believe at least 80 people have died following the Grenfell Tower fire.

As the inquiry into the disaster has begun exactly three months on, here are the 71 people identified as either killed or presumed dead following the blaze.

Floor 23

Amna Mahmud Idris

The remains of Amna Mahmud Idris, 27, were discovered on the second highest floor of the high-rise following the devastating inferno, her inquest heard.

Gary Maunders

Gary Maunders, 57, was recovered from the 23rd floor of Grenfell Tower. He was believed to have been with his friend Deborah Lamprell, who also died in the blaze, when the fire broke out.

Mr Maunders died from injuries "consistent with the effects of fire", an inquest heard.

Rania Ibrham and children

(Image: Facebook)

Believed to be a mother of two small children - Fathia and Hania - Rania Ibrham, 30, uploaded a harrowing Facebook Live video as she appeared to be stuck at the top of the tower block.

In the footage, she can be seen seeking help in the smoke-covered corridor of the block before going back into her home and looking down on the street below from her balcony.

Gloria Trevisan and Marco Gottardi

(Image: glo_trevi/Instagram)

The young Italian couple Gloria Trevisan, 26, and Marco Gottardi, 27, had only recently moved into the 23rd floor of Grenfell Tower. They have both been confirmed dead.

Ms Trevisan called her mother in Italy at roughly 3.30am on Wednesday to say their building was ablaze, according to the Italian newspaper Corriere del Veneto.

Fathia Ahmed and children

Fathia Ahmed, 71 - thought also to be referred to as Fathiya Alsanousi - and son Abufars Ibrahim, 39, have been confirmed dead by authorities following the blaze.

There has been no official news on the fate of Esra Ibrahim, 35, who is thought to be her daughter.

Raymond "Moses" Bernard

(Image: Internet Unknown)

The body of Raymond Bernard, 63, was discovered in his flat along with that of one of the youngest victims - 12-year-old Biruk Haftom.

The family of Mr Bernard - known to his friends as Moses - said: "Gone but not forgotten, you are so dearly loved by us all and will be sadly missed by many.

"May you rest in eternal peace, with love always."

Mohamed Neda

(Image: SWNS.com)

Mohamed Amied Neda, 57, was found outside the tower block and died as a result of multiple injuries consistent with a fall.

Hesham Rahman

Hesham Rahman, 57, was found dead in the flat where he lived alone in Grenfell Tower.

He is said to have last made contact with his family at around 3am when he told them he could smell smoke.

It was also reported that Mr Rahman has diabetes, making it difficult for him to walk down stairs.

Floor 22

The Choucair family

Nadia Choucair and her husband Bassem lived on the 22nd floor with their three daughters Mierna, 13, Fatima, 11, and Zeinab, three. All but Zeinab have been confirmed dead by a coroner at inquest.

Nadia's brother, Nabil Choucair, told the Guardian last month that he was still waiting for information about the six members of his family.

"The answers are not being given. People are asking the questions, but we are being told, 'We still don't know,"' he said.

Nura Jemal, Hashim Kedir, Firdows Hashim and Yahya Hashim

(Image: MPS)

Four members of a family of five living on the 22nd floor have been confirmed dead following the fire.

Hashim Kedir, 44, died alongside wife Nura Jemal, 35, their daughter Firdows Hashim, 12, and son Yahya Hashim, 13. There has been no official news on another son Yaqub, who was also missing.

Family described Mr Kedir as "everybody's favourite in the family" who could "make friends so easily".

"One can tell the kind of person you were from the diversity of people that are crying over your death," a statement added.

Mrs Jemal, the mother of the family, was described as vibrant, full of life and positive-minded", while their daughter, Firdows, was described as "the most intelligent, wise and eloquent girl" with "the voice of an angel". Family said Yahya was "kind, handsome, pure hearted" and "sweet".

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Floor 21

Logan Gomes

Police have recorded baby Logan Gomes, who was stillborn in hospital after his parents escaped the fire, as a victim of the fire.

His family, who lived on the 21st floor, managed to escape from the blaze but mother Andreia Gomes lost the child, giving birth to him as she lay unconscious in hospital hours after they escaped.

Speaking to The Sunday Telegraph, her husband Marco said doctors had opted to deliver the infant after his heart stopped beating to ensure she would not contract an infection, adding it was a "very traumatic time".

The El-Wahabi family

(Image: PA)

Abdulaziz El-Wahabi, 52, wife Faouzia, 41, and their eldest son Yasin, 20, have been confirmed dead at inquests. There has as yet been no official news on daughter Nurhouda, 15, and youngest son Medhi, eight.

All five lived on the 21st floor of the tower, according to Mr El-Wahabi's sister.

Hana El-Wahabi told reporters: "I rang him and the fire had not reached the top of the block at that point.

"He said he had been told to stay inside, stay in one room together and put towels under the door.

"I told him to leave. He said he was going to come. Then I called him and he said there was too much smoke.

"The last time I saw him they were waving out the window. The last time I spoke to his wife, he was on the phone to the fire brigade."

Ligaya Moore

(Image: Internet Unknown)

The Embassy of the Philippines in London says Ligaya Moore, 79, a Filipino living in the tower, is missing and presumed dead.

Family of Mrs Moore told the Press Association she is diabetic, and has lived in London for more than 40 years.

Mrs Moore's grandson, Nico Purificacion, called her "an admirable woman".

"Our family loves her so much," he said. "She's very fun to be with despite her age. So innocent yet very straightforward. She's been in London for a very long time, she visits us here in the Philippines once in a while."

Floor 20

Khadija Saye and Mary Mendy

(Image: PA)

Artist Khadija Saye, also known as Ya-Haddy Sisi Saye, died in the hallway on the ninth floor as a result of inhalation of fire fumes and burns.

She was hailed as a "wonderful young woman" by Tottenham MP David Lammy, and was due to appear on a BBC documentary about her work, which was on show in Venice as part of a collection on the theme of diaspora.

Ms Saye's mother, Mary Mendy - also known as Sissy Mendy - is thought to have been visiting her daughter on the 20th floor of Grenfell Tower when the fire broke out. She died on the 13th floor, an inquest heard.

Jessica Urbano Ramirez

(Image: Police Handout)

Jessica Urbano Ramirez, 12, died on the 23rd floor of Grenfell Tower.

Last month, her family and friends celebrated what would have been the schoolgirl's 13th birthday at a gathering in Avondale Park, west London.

Her Aunt Ana Ospina told the Press Association shortly after the fire took place: "She last spoke to her mum when she borrowed a phone and told her she was on the stairs with other people."

The Belkadi family

Four members of a family of five were killed in the blaze at Grenfell Tower, with the fifth - a young child - taken to hospital.

Mother Farah Hamdan, 31, and her husband Omar Belkadi, 32, lived on the 20th floor of Grenfell Tower with their daughters Malek, seven, Tazmin, six, and Leena, just six months old.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Leena Belkadi and her sister Malak both died from inhalation of fumes during the blaze. Their mother and father also died in the blaze, with the youngest child found in her mother's arms between the 19th and 20th floors of the building.

Malak was recovered from the 20th floor and died later at St Mary's Hospital, where she was taken alongside her sister Tazmin, who is believed to have survived.

Floor 19

Mariem and Eslah Elgwahry

Mariem Elgwahry, 27, lived on the 19th floor of the tower with her mother Eslah Elgwahry, 64.

The bodies of the two women were found side by side on the 23rd floor where they had tried to escape the blaze.

Mohamednur Tuccu and family

The body of Mohamednur Tuccu, 44, was recovered from close to the nearby leisure centre, where was found to have suffered multiple injuries.

He had been reported missing alongside his wife Amalahmedin and their three-year-old daughter Amaya after visiting relatives in Grenfell Tower, his employer previously said.

Floor 18

Berkti and Biruk Haftom

(Image: PA)

Berkti Haftom, 29, and 12-year-old son Biruk were found dead near one another near the top of the tower block - suggesting they sought refuge in a flat further up the building.

Their family said: "Berkti and Biruk left an everlasting legacy full of lovely memories and their contagious laughter and charisma will live in our hearts forever.

"We are deeply hurt and heartbroken our angels were taken from us so cruelly, so young. We will not rest until justice is served."

Sakineh and Fatima Afraseiabi

Sisters Sakineh, 65, and Fatemeh Afrasiabi, 59, moved to the UK in 1997 and lived on the 18th floor of the block. They, like the Elgwahrys, were found dead on the 23rd floor of the building.

The Iranian family of the pair, who are presumed to have died, told the Guardian that Sakineh was disabled and only able to move with a walking stick.

She said: "She was forced to live there because she had no other option. On a good day she couldn't come down 18 floors - but in the fire and smoke?"

Isaac Paulos

(Image: ENTERPRISE NEWS AND PICTURES)

Five-year-old Isaac Paulos was last seen escaping the blaze with neighbours and family, but reportedly got lost in the smoke.

The boy, who vanished in the dense fumes as his family attempted to escape the blaze, choked to death on fumes from the fire and was found on the 13th floor of the building.

In a statement released by the Metropolitan Police, his family said: "Isaac our beloved son was taken from us when he was only five years old.

"We will all miss our kind, energetic, generous little boy.

"He was such a good boy who was loved by his friends and family.

"We will miss him forever, but we know God is looking after him now and that he is safe in heaven."

Floor 17

Khadija Khalloufi

Fifty-two-year-old Khadija Khalloufi died from inhalation of fumes, an inquest heard.

She leaves behind husband Sabah Abdullah, who was granted an emergency passport to attend her funeral in Morocco, after his identification was lost in the fire.

"I'm relieved now. At least I know I'm going to fulfil the wish of my late wife," he told the BBC after the broadcaster appealed to the Home Office on his behalf.

Vincent Chiejina

Vincent Chiejina, 60, was recovered from the 17th floor of the building and identified by DNA, his inquest heard.

The coroner's officer said the provisional cause of death had been given as "consistent with the effects of fire".

The Begum family

A family of five who lived on the 17th floor are confirmed to have died.

Kamru Miah, 79, Rabeya Begum, 64, Mohammed Hamid, 27, Mohammed Hanif, 26 and Husna Begum, 22, were found on the 17th floor of the building and died from injuries "consistent with the effects of fire", their inquests heard.

Floor 16

Joseph Daniels

Joseph Daniels, 69, reportedly suffered from dementia and could not be persuaded by his son to leave the building. He died from injuries consistent with the effects of fire, an inquest heard.

Deborah Lamprell

Deborah, or Debbie, Lamprell, 45, worked front of house at Opera Holland Park. She was described by her mother as a "wonderful, precious daughter, always smiling and helping others."

In honour of their colleague, the opera house in west London held a special encore at a recent performance, before which a private memorial service was held for around 100 people - including family and performers at the venue.

Michael Volpe, general director at the company, said she had worked for them for "several years" and called her "a really valued member of staff", adding: "She will be remembered here."

"Part of her job was to go backstage and check things backstage. Not only was she known to all of our patrons, she was really popular with all the singers, chorus and the orchestra and she had a lovely way about her."

Marjorie and Ernie Vital

Marjorie Vital, 68, and her son Ernie, 50, lived on the 16th floor of Grenfell Tower and died on the 23rd floor.

The family of Mr Vital, who worked in catering, said he was a "proud, humble, mature and independent man", a "loyal son" and a "law-abiding citizen".

His mother, a former textile worker, has been described as a "kind-hearted" woman who dedicated her life to her children.

Sheila Smith

Sheila, 84 - formerly known as Sheila Smith - lived on the 16th floor of Grenfell Tower, where she died with injuries "consistent with the effects of fire", an inquest heard.

A friend, Gary Allen, said he had known her for 20 years, and described her as a "truly beautiful person" and "love, pure and simple".

"We shared a great interest in history, Shakespeare, the Knights Templar, etcetera and she had a great spirituality about her," he said.

Floor 15

Hamid Kani

(Image: @PouriaLiravi/Twitter)

The body of 60-year-old Hamid Kani was found on the 23rd floor, an inquest heard. His family had said he lived on the 15th floor but had no relatives in the the UK.

"All members of his family are here in Iran," Mr Kani's niece, Maryam Shahvarani, told the Press Association. "They are worried to death about him."

She said he lived alone, struggled with hearing problems and wore hearing aids.

The inquest was told Mr Kani died of injuries "consistent with the effects of fire".

Steve Power

Steve Power, 63, died on the 15th floor of the tower, where he is thought to have lived.

Several family members have posted online speaking of their heartbreak at not being able to find him.

Floor 14

Mohammed Al Haj Ali

Twenty-three-year-old Syrian refugee Mohammed Al Haj Ali was the first fatality from the disaster to be formally identified by police.

Having reportedly been stuck in his flat on the 14th floor for two hours, he was later found outside the tower block having fallen from the burning building.

His funeral was held a week after the disaster and was attended by his family, some of whom came over from Syria, and the Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan .

A family statement read at the service said he "loved London and loved the people he met here", and had begun pursuing his dream of studying engineering.

"He was a loving and caring person, always showing support and solidarity for friends and family stuck back in Syria."

Dennis Murphy

(Image: Facebook)

The family of 56-year-old Dennis Murphy say they were left with a "gaping hole in our hearts that can never be filled" after he was formally identified as one of the victims of the tragedy.

He is believed to have become trapped on the 14th floor of the burning block. His family spoke of an "agonising 10 weeks" between the disaster and his formal identification.

Zainab and Jeremiah Deen

(Image: Facebook)

Zainab Deen was in her flat with her two-year-old son Jeremiah when the fire broke out. They were found dead at each others' side.

Originally from Sierra Leone, Ms Deen was described as a "beautiful, loving lady" when a group of friends gathered near Grenfell Tower to pay tribute to her.

In a tribute issued by police, Jeremiah's family said of him: "You spent a moment in our arms, but you will last a lifetime in our hearts."

Isha Thomas, a friend of Ms Deen, said she believed the 32-year-old was following advice not to leave the building, adding: "She was on the phone to her brother until four in the morning."

She added: "We are just devastated. I just want them (authorities) to answer. We need answers, we need to know what happened."

Floor 11

Abdeslam Sebbar

Abdeslam Sebbar, 67, is thought to have lived on the 11th floor of Grenfell Tower, where he was discovered. He died from an inhalation of fire fumes, an inquest heard.

Floor 10

Ali Yawar Jafari

(Image: hamidalijafari/Twitter)

Ali Yawar Jafari, 81, was pulled from Grenfell Tower by firefighters but was pronounced dead at the scene due to inhalation of fire fumes, his inquest heard.

His son, Hamid Ali Jafari, said his father had lost contact with his mother and sister, who lived with him in Grenfell Tower, on the 10th floor.

Anthony Disson

Known as Tony, 65-year-old Anthony Disson is reported to have last been in contact with his family at around 3am while he was inside the building. An inquest heard that he died from inhalation of fire fumes.

He is reported to have lived on the 10th floor and is survived by four sons, five grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. A sixth grandchild is due in September.

He was laid to rest a mile from the tower in Ladbroke Grove, at a ceremony in June attended by Sadiq Khan.