Data from large scale fires in enclosures, such as a room, shows much higher levels of the two of the major toxicants, carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen cyanide (HCN) under conditions of developed flaming (Andersson et al. 2005 ; Blomqvist & Lonnermark 2001 ). It is therefore essential to the assessment of toxic hazard from fire that each fire stage can be adequately replicated, and preferably the individual fire stages treated separately.

Almost all unwanted fires are diffusion flames, with inefficient mixing of fuel and oxygen (as opposed to the "premixed" flames found in burner/combustion systems). The interior of large flames are always under-ventilated, because oxygen cannot penetrate the flame. For any larger fire there will always be a significant yield of CO, HCN (from nitrogen containing materials), hydrocarbons and smoke.

Although on some occasions smouldering (oxidative pyrolysis) can generate toxicologically significant quantities of effluent (for example smouldering cotton, or polyurethane foam), typically the rate of reaction, and hence the amount of toxic species generated will be small, so it is unlikely to affect anyone outside the immediate vicinity. Similarly, well-ventilated fires are generally small, and of low toxicity. As fires grow, they become ventilation controlled, and fires in enclosures such as buildings rapidly change from well-ventilated to under-ventilated. These fires are large, relative to the enclosure, and produce greater volumes of effluent, affecting occupants over a much wider part of any building. While well-ventilated fire scenarios are routinely used for assessment of flammability, because the object is to stop the fire growing to the out of control stage, where fire toxicity is concerned, the important fire stages are under-ventilated. There are two reasons for this:

The dangerous concentrations of some important toxic fire gases are shown in Tablealongside the influence of ventilation condition on their yields. The yields of acid gases and nitrogen-containing products depend upon the proportion of the appropriate elements in the materials burned and the efficiency of conversion. In general conversion efficiencies are high for halogen acid gases. Most fuel nitrogen is released as N, but in well-ventilated combustion conditions a proportion is released as oxides of nitrogen (mainly NO) and in under-ventilated combustion conditions a proportion is released as HCN (Purser & Purser). CO yields are generally very low for well-ventilated conditions (in the absence of halogens) but increase considerably under-ventilated combustion conditions. Acrolein and formaldehyde are formed especially from cellulosic materials under non-flaming decomposition conditions, but products of vitiated combustion contain other organic irritants.

The main toxic combustion products can be divided into two classes: asphyxiant gases, which prevent oxygen uptake by cells, with loss of consciousness and ultimately death; and irritant gases which cause immediate incapacitation, mainly by effects on the eyes and upper respiratory tract, and longer term damage deeper in the lung. The effect of asphyxiants and deep lung irritants depend on the accumulated doses, i.e. the sum of each of the concentrations multiplied by the exposure time, for each product; upper respiratory tract irritants are believed to depend on the concentration alone (Purser 2007 ).

The toxic hazards associated with fire and the inability of victims to escape from fire atmospheres may be considered in terms of major hazard factors: heat, smoke and toxic combustion products (Hartzell 1993 ). The time available for escape is the interval between the time of ignition and the time after which conditions become untenable, such that occupants can no longer take effective action to accomplish their own escape. This can result from exposure to radiant and convected heat; visual obscuration due to smoke; inhalation of asphyxiant gases; and exposure to sensory/upper-respiratory irritants. Fire gases contain a mixture of fully oxidised products, such as carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), partially oxidised products, such as carbon monoxide (CO) and aldehydes, fuel and fuel degradation products, such as aliphatic or aromatic hydrocarbons, and other stable gas molecules, such as hydrogen halides (HCl, HBr) and hydrogen cyanide (HCN) (Kaplan et al. 1984a ). Heat, smoke and irritant gases may impair escape, increasing the risk of a lethal exposure to asphyxiant gases, and can sometimes lung damage causes death in those managing to escape.

Oxygen depletion can be lethal if the oxygen concentration falls below tenable levels (~6 %). However, from a fire toxicity perspective it is generally assumed that heat and other gases will have already prevented survival, while other toxicants such as CO or HCN, will be present in lethal quantities further from the fire where the oxygen depletion would not be considered harmful.

Asphyxiant or narcotic gases cause a decrease in oxygen supplied to body tissue, resulting in central nervous system depression, with loss of consciousness and ultimately death. The severity of the effects increases with dose (Hartzell 1993 ). The main asphyxiants, carbon monoxide and hydrogen cyanide have been widely studied and are the best understood (ISO 13571 2007 ). In addition, asphyxiation can also occur as a result of lowered oxygen concentration, and is affected by the carbon dioxide concentration.

The toxic effect of carbon monoxide is characterised by a lowered oxygen-delivery capacity of the blood, even when the partial pressure of oxygen and the rate of blood flow are normal. Carbon monoxide binds to the haemoglobin in red blood cells resulting in the formation of carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb), with stability 200 times greater than that of oxyhaemoglobin, impeding the transport of oxygen from the lungs to the cells in the body. This causes deterioration in mental and muscular performance. CO also combines with myoglobin in the muscle cells, impairing diffusion of oxygen to cardiac and skeletal muscles (Purser 2008b ). Over short periods, inhaled CO impairs an individuals ability to escape, causing different effects at different concentrations. At a CO concentration of 10 ppm, impairment of judgement and visual perception occur; exposure to 100 ppm causes dizziness, headache, and weariness; loss of consciousness occurs at 250 ppm; and 1000 ppm results in rapid death.

Hydrogen cyanide is approximately 25 times more toxic than carbon monoxide through the formation of the cyanide ion, which is formed by hydrolysis in the blood (Hartzell 1993 ). Unlike carbon monoxide which remains primarily in the blood (as COHb), the cyanide ion is distributed throughout the extra-cellular fluid of tissues and organs (ISO 13571 2007 ). Two mechanisms have been identified for the toxic effects of cyanide. The first is by combination with the ferric ion in mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase, preventing electron transport in the cytochrome system and inhibiting the use of oxygen by the cells. The second results in a brief stimulation, followed by severe depression, of respiratory frequency, also starving the body of oxygen, and causing convulsions, respiratory arrest and death (Alarie 2002 ). Whether one or other of these mechanisms predominates, or their interrelationship, remains unclear. HCN also causes rapid incapacitation, preventing escape, and then, with CO, contributes to death from asphyxiation. One analysis of fire victims' blood showed a trend of declining COHb and a rise in cyanide concentrations (Anderson et al. 1981 ), probably because of increased use of nitrogen-containing synthetic polymers. The uptake, distribution, metabolism and excretion of cyanide is much more complex than for CO and quantifying CN - in fire victims is more expensive and not routinely undertaken. Therefore the contribution of HCN to fire deaths is difficult to assess, and analysis for CN − is limited to cases where lethal concentrations of CO are absent.

In contrast to the relatively well-defined effects of asphyxiants, the effects of exposure to irritants are more complex. Irritant gases cause pain and breathing difficulties, leading to incapacitation, such that the victim can no longer effect their own escape (ISO 13571 2012). Sensory and upper respiratory tract irritation stimulates the trigeminal and vagus nerve receptors in the eyes, nose, throat and upper respiratory tract causing discomfort, then severe pain. The effects range from tears and reflex blinking of the eyes, pain in the nose, throat and chest, breath-holding, coughing, excessive secretion of mucus, to bronchoconstriction and laryngeal spasms (Purser 2008b ). At sufficiently high concentrations, or when attached to submicron particles, such as soot, most irritants can penetrate deeper into the lungs, causing pulmonary irritation effects which may cause post-exposure respiratory distress and death, generally occurring from a few hours to several days after exposure, due to pulmonary oedema (flooding of the lungs) (ISO 13571 2007 )

Hydrogen chloride (HCl) and hydrogen bromide (HBr) are strong acids which dissociate entirely in water. Both may be present in fire effluent, for example from PVC or halogenated flame retardants, and since the damage caused by the acidity (the concentration of H + ions) is independent of the specific anion (Cl − or Br − ), the discussion on HCl is also applicable to HBr.

Nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) are non-flammable gases present in fire effluents. At high concentrations nitric oxide is rapidly oxidised in air to form nitrogen dioxide, however, at the concentrations found in fire gases, most of the nitric oxide remains unoxidised. Nitrogen dioxide dissolves rapidly in water to form nitric and nitrous acid. At high concentrations these acids can cause pulmonary oedema and death (Paul et al. 2008 ; Kaplan 1987b ). Conversely, nitric oxide gas at low concentrations (~20 ppm) has been used to aid breathing in the treatment of respiratory disorders (Kavanagh & Pearl 1995 ).

In order to relate the fire effluent toxicity to a "maximum permissible loading", the FED can be related to the mass of material in a unit volume which would cause 50 % lethality for a given fire condition. The fire toxicity of a material can also be expressed as a material-LC 50 , which in this case is the specimen mass M of a burning polymeric material which would yield an FED equal to one within a volume of 1 m 3 . The relation of the FED to the material-LC 50 is given in equation 4 .

This equation only relates to lethality, or cause of death. However, many people fail to escape from fires because of the incapacitating effect of smoke (obscuring visibility) and its irritant components which cause pain, preventing breathing and escape or reason death occurred. ISO 13571 ( 2007 ) considers the four major hazards from fire which may prevent escape (toxic gases, irritant gases, heat and smoke obscuration). Equations 2 and 3 have been taken from ISO 13571 ( 2007 ). Equation 2 calculates the FED of the major asphyxiants, CO and HCN, but without taking oxygen depletion or CO 2 driven hyperventilation into account. Equation 3 calculates the Fractional Effective Concentration (FEC) of sensory irritants in the fire effluent which limit escape. Equation 2 represents the generally accepted case that there are only two significant asphyxiant fire gases, CO and HCN. The FED value is calculated using the exposed dose relationship (concentration-time product, C∙t) for CO. The incapacitating C∙t product corresponds to CO at a dose of 35 000 μL L −1 min (approximately equal to ppm min), predicting incapacitation at around 1200 ppm for 30 min exposure, and an exponential relationship for HCN (because asphyxiation by HCN exposure does not fit a linear relationship), predicting incapacitation at around 82 ppm for 30 min exposure. However, as fires tend to grow exponentially, they do not produce constant concentrations of asphyxiant gases.

The general approach in generating toxic potency data from chemical analysis is to assume additive behaviour of individual toxicants, and to express the concentration of each as its fraction of the lethal concentration for 50 % of the population for a 30 min exposure (gas-LC 50 ). Summing these contributions generates a fractional effective dose (FED). An FED equal to one indicates that the sum of concentrations of individual species will be lethal to 50 % of the population over a 30 min exposure. These types of approaches have used existing rat lethality data, as described in ISO 13344 ( 1996 ) or more recently, based on the best available estimates of human toxicity thresholds as described in ISO 13571 ( 2007 ). An equation has been developed for the estimation of the FED for lethality from the chemical composition of the environment in the physical fire (such as the bench-scale methods described in the following section) model taken from ISO 13344 ( 1996 ) and uses gas-LC 50 values for lethality to provide reference toxicity data for the individual gases to calculate toxic potency, based on rats exposed for 30 min. The Purser model, presented in equation 1 , uses \( {\mathrm{V}}_{{\mathrm{CO}}_2} \) a multiplication factor for CO 2 driven by hyperventilation, therefore increasing the FED contribution from all the toxic species, and incorporates an acidosis factor A to account for toxicity of CO 2 in its own right (ISO 13344 1996 ).

Most fire deaths and injuries actually occur in residential fires, although assessment of fire toxicity is currently focused on areas where escape is restricted, such as aeroplanes, railway carriages, and passenger ships, which include requirements to quantify the fire toxicity of internal components. In most countries, there are no regulations covering the fire toxicity of building components, or for most road vehicles, including goods vehicles in tunnels. In China and Japan, there are specific restrictions on the use of materials with high fire toxicity in high risk applications such as tall buildings, while an increasing number of jurisdictions permit the alternative performance based design approaches to fire safety. Reliable rate of heat release, fire effluent toxicity and smoke generation data are all essential components of such an assessment. The general approach, described in ISO 13571 ( 2012 ), is to ensure that the available safe escape time (ASET) before escape routes become obscured by smoke and/or filled with toxic gases, exceeds the required safe escape time (RSET). Various apparatus and protocols for quantifying fire effluent toxicity in different jurisdictions and industries have been critically reviewed (Hull & Paul 2007 ).

The relationship between equivalence ratio and yields of CO and other products has been studied in detail for a wide range of materials during flaming combustion using two small-scale apparatus designed specifically for this purpose—the ASTM E2058 fire propagation apparatus (Tewarson 2002 ) and the ISO/TS 19700 tube furnace apparatus (ISO/TS 19700 2013 ), in conjunction with a series of large-scale experiments used for validation (Gottuk & Lattimer 2002 ; Blomqvist & Lonnermark 2001 ; Purser & Purser 2008a ). The findings from these studies demonstrated that yields of different toxic products are highly dependent on equivalence ratio (either positively or negatively correlated), and elemental and molecular composition of the material. To a lesser extent, parameters such as temperature and oxygen concentration also affect the yields of toxic products.

The relatively high yields of CO from under-ventilated fires are held responsible for most deaths through inhalation of smoke and toxic gases. However, in the field of combustion toxicity testing, this under-ventilated burning is the most difficult to create using bench-scale apparatus. Research predicting the carbon monoxide evolution from flames of simple hydrocarbons, reviewed by Pitts (), has shown the importance of the equivalence ratio ϕ.

Bench-scale methods used for generating toxic effluents from polyurethane foams have met with controversy. Some methods have proved incapable of properly replicating the most toxic under-ventilated fire condition, where the yields of carbon monoxide and hydrogen cyanide are greatest, while other methods have shown good correlation with large scale test data. Bench-scale methods used for generation of toxic fire effluents ideally should be capable of reproducing individual fire stages or combustion conditions, for input into models of combustion toxicity. Full-scale fires simultaneously involve different fire stages in different places, which are changing with time. However, bench-scale methods which allow the combustion conditions to change during the test are much more difficult to relate to full-scale fires, because the duration of each condition is unknown, and the behaviour of fires changes on scale-up. Most bench-scale methods have non-constant combustion conditions, such as those in closed chambers exposed to a constant source of heat, including the smoke density chamber (SDC) (ISO 5659–2 2012 ), and static tube furnace tests, such as the NF X 70–100 ( 2006 ). Those with constant combustion conditions are more suited to producing data suitable for comparison and modelling: the steady state tube furnace (SSTF) (ISO/TS 19700 2013 ) has been specifically designed to achieve this. Intermediate between these two approaches are those that can produce quasi-steady combustion conditions, such as the cone calorimeter (ISO 5660–1 2002 ) with non-standardised controlled atmosphere attachment (CACC), and the fire propagation apparatus (FPA) (ISO 12136 2011 ). The difficulty of replicating the conditions of fully developed under-ventilated flaming on a bench-scale is caused by several practical problems. ϕ depends on the mass loss rate of the specimen and the available air; for most methods one or both are unknown; ϕ will be increased by an unknown factor if products are recirculated into the flame zone. Apparatus where ϕ changes rapidly allow little time for sampling and measurement of mass loss and effluent composition at a specific value of ϕ, with resultant errors and uncertainties. Progressive changes in the composition of a static specimen (for example due to char formation) provide additional complexity. In a compartment fire, the reactions of under-ventilated flaming occur in both the flame zone and in the hot upper layer. Only the SSTF has a heated reaction zone which replicates the hot layer. The applied heat flux must be large enough for burning to continue at oxygen concentrations as low as 5 %. In some bench-scale apparatus the heat flux is constant, and often insufficient to sustain flaming at such low oxygen concentrations; further, an unknown quantity of fresh air bypasses the fire plume, so the ventilation condition, and hence ϕ, remains undefined. Some fire models, such as the cone calorimeter, fire propagation apparatus and smoke density chamber use the temperature of the radiant heater to preselect the radiant heat flux, and then check this using a radiant heat flux meter. Others, such as the NF X 70–100, and the ISO/TS 19700 SSTF use the furnace temperature setting to ensure a consistent radiant heat flux. The radiant heat flux in the ISO/TS 19700 apparatus has been measured (Stec et al. 2008 ) and is 40 kW m −2 in the centre of the furnace at 650 °C and 78 kW m −2 at 825 °C. Each method is described briefly in the following section.

The transport industries have adopted the smoke density chamber (SDC) ISO 5659–2 ( 2012 ) and ASTM E662 , for quantification of toxic product yields (Fire Test Procedure Code 2010 ; CEN/TS 45545–2 2009 ) using simple pass/fail chemical detection (e.g. Draeger tubes), conventional or Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) gas analysis, despite significant problems of reproducibility. It has been suggested that the reproducibility problems arise from the single point measurement (the tip of the probe may be in the centre of the plume, below it, or if mixing is more efficient, the upper layer may be recirculated through the flame), or the timing of the effluent sampling may cause instabilities (for example an initial proposal to sample after 8 min was replaced by a proposal to sample when the smoke density reached its maximum). The revised protocol is based on continuous sampling of the fire effluent.

The most widely used fire-test apparatus, stipulated in smoke regulations in most countries of the developed world, is the smoke density chamber as described in ISO 5659–2, and shown schematically in Fig.. Its widespread availability has encouraged its adaptation to toxic gas generation and assessment. The standard specifies four test conditions, but fails to link them to particular fire scenarios. The conditions specified are: 25 kW mwithout piloted ignition; 25 kW mwith piloted ignition; 50 kW mwithout piloted ignition; and 50 kW mwith piloted ignition. The sample is a 75 × 75 mm square solid sheet and the standard for smoke measurement states that the results are only valid at the thickness tested (typically 1–4 mm). For a fixed chamber volume (0.51 m), assuming complete combustion, the sample thickness will dictate the ventilation condition, thus a thin sample will burn under well-ventilated conditions with minimum toxic products, while a thicker sample might be expected to produce a high yield of CO and other products of incomplete combustion. The protocol has been modified as a toxicity test by the mass transport industries, in the aircraft (EN2011), maritime (Fire Test Procedure Code), and railway tests (CEN/TS 45545–2). Some of these methods attempt to address the transition through the fire stages by monitoring the formation of toxic gases as a function of time, as the oxygen concentration falls, and the fire condition changes from well-ventilated to under-ventilated. However, unlike a real fire, the heat flux remains constant, and so when the oxygen concentration falls, the flame may be extinguished.

The cone calorimeter (ISO 5660–1) is probably the most widely used apparatus for measurement of flammability properties such as ignitability and heat release rate (Schartel & Hull). It can be used for testing samples 100 × 100 mm and up to 50 mm thick, in both the horizontal and vertical orientation. The open cone calorimeter replicates the early well-ventilated stage of flaming where a fire would be too small to produce enough toxicants to cause harm except in very small enclosures. However, a non-standard modification of the apparatus has been described, enclosing the fire model in a controlled ventilation chamber, in an attempt to replicate oxygen-depleted conditions. In this modification, the controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter (CACC) (Babrauskas et al.), shown in Fig., a conical heater used as a fire model is enclosed in a heat resistant glass chamber (400 mm high with 300 × 300 mm base) so that the air flow around the specimen may be controlled by diluting the oxygen content with nitrogen. In some cases the effluent continues to burn as it emerges from the chamber, (secondary flaming in Fig.) ultimately giving well-ventilated flaming. In others, under reduced oxygen concentrations, the fuel lifts from the surface, but ignition does not occur (Christy et al.). Hietaniemi et al. () used the controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter, but argues correctly, in the authors' opinion, that an instantaneous “effective” global equivalence ratio ϕ, should be used, rather than an averaged local equivalence ratio, based on the oxygen supply to the chamber, because, in some experiments, substantial secondary flaming occurred outside the test chamber, such that the amount of oxygen available to combustion exceeded the amount that was fed to the enclosed chamber.

The steady state tube furnace (ISO/TS 19700), shown in Fig., feeds the sample (typically around 25 g of pellets or granules) into its hot zone at a fixed rate, under a controlled air supply, inside a horizontal silica tube of diameter 48 mm, allowing adequate mixing of fuel and oxidant. It forces combustion by driving the sample into a furnace of increasing heat flux at a fixed rate, so that, by running several tests with the same material with different ventilation conditions, each fire stage can be replicated by steady state burning. The products generated in the flame zone then pass through the heated furnace tube, maintaining a high temperature, as in the upper layer of a compartment fire. The toxic product yields may be quantified from the gas concentrations and mass feed rate during the steady state burn period. It has been designed to generate data for input to fire hazard assessments, using the methodology in ISO 13344 () and ISO 13571 (), particularly in relation to the ISO fire stages. The sample is spread evenly in a silica boat over a length of 800 mm and fed into a tube furnace at a typical rate of 1 g minwith flowing air at a rate of 2-10 L min. Secondary air is added in a mixing chamber to give a total gas flow of 50 L min

The yields of CO and HCN from five bench-scale methods have been compared to large-scale data under a range of flaming fire conditions (Stec & Hull 2014 ). Toxic product yield data from the smoke density chamber (ISO 5659–2 2012 ), the controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter (based on ISO 5660–1 2002 ), the fire propagation apparatus (FPA) (ASTM E 2058), the French railway test (NFX) ( NF X 70–100 2006 ), and the steady state tube furnace (SSTF) (ISO/TS 19700 2013 ) were compared to published large-scale enclosure fire data (from a standard ISO 9705 room) for two polymers, polypropylene (PP) and polyamide 6.6 (PA 6.6). The results from the SSTF and FPA show the best agreement with those from the full and 1/3 scale ISO room for both materials under a range of fire conditions. The CACC and SDC show reasonable agreement for well-ventilated burning, but fail to replicate the more hazardous under-ventilated fire conditions. The NFX generates data intermediate between the well-ventilated and under-ventilated fire conditions.

Toxic products formed during flaming combustion of polyurethane foams

13 2013 In the UK, the rapid rise in fire deaths, in particular those from smoke toxicity, between the late 1950s and the early 1980s has been attributed to the rapid growth in low cost polyurethane foam furniture, with superior comfort and lower cost than the natural fillings that preceded it. The higher flammability of these new furniture products took people by surprise, and has been blamed for an increased number of serious fires and a tripling of fire deaths over 20 years (Fig.) (UK Fire Statistics).

14 2013 Over this period there was a corresponding shift from the main cause of death in fires being attributed to “burns” to being attributed to “inhalation of smoke and toxic gases”. Further to this, a similar pattern began to emerge in the injuries of fire victims (Fig.) (UK Fire Statistics).

The yields of some of the most toxic gases from unwanted fires (such as CO, HCN and some organic irritants) have been demonstrated to be directly related to the combustion conditions (Purser 2002). In the case of flaming combustion, one of the most important factors relating to the toxic product yield is the fuel/air ratio which, as defined earlier, can be expressed as an equivalence ratio (ϕ). As the availability of oxygen becomes lower in proportion to the amount of fuel, the yields of certain toxic gases will increase. In ventilation controlled fires (such as those occurring in a room, building or other enclosure), the yields of these gases from the flaming combustion of polyurethane foams generally follow the same trend. As a result of this, studies that use ventilation controlled conditions, such as those using the steady state tube furnace (ISO/TS 19700 2013), are more likely to give a realistic representation of these reduced oxygen environment fire conditions.

2011 2013 2 and NO 2 were at their highest, while the yields of CO and HCN were at their lowest. However, as the fire condition became under-ventilated (ϕ > 1.5), the yields of both CO and HCN increased for both rigid polyurethane and the polyisocyanurate, while the yields of CO 2 and NO 2 decreased. The yields of CO and HCN at varying ϕ and temperature are presented in Table 5 −1 vs 225 mg g−1). The polyisocyanurate, on the other hand, produced slightly more HCN than the rigid foam (17 mg g−1 vs 12 mg g−1). Additionally, the amount of CO generated for both materials began to taper off at ϕ 1.2-2.0 as the available oxygen becomes so low that the generation of CO becomes limited, while the yield of HCN continues to increase with equivalence ratio and temperature. The authors noted that the yields of CO during the well-ventilated testing were higher than expected for both materials, and attributed this to the possible presence of gas phase free radical quenchers, such as halogens or phosphorous containing flame retardants, which would reduce the conversion of CO to CO 2 (Schnipper & Smith-Hansen 1995 Material Furnace temperature (°C) ϕ CO Yield/mg g−1 HCN Yield/mg g−1 Rigid Polyurethane Foam 650 0.69 60 6 650 1.24 220 9 825 2.00 240 12 Polyisocyanurate Foam 650 0.75 80 7 650 1.34 220 10 825 1.97 225 17 Stec and Hull () assessed the fire toxicity of building insulation materials using a steady state tube furnace as described in ISO/TS 19700 (). The samples tested included both commercial rigid polyurethane foam and polyisocyanurate foam. Under well-ventilated flaming (ϕ < 0.8), the yields of COand NOwere at their highest, while the yields of CO and HCN were at their lowest. However, as the fire condition became under-ventilated (ϕ > 1.5), the yields of both CO and HCN increased for both rigid polyurethane and the polyisocyanurate, while the yields of COand NOdecreased. The yields of CO and HCN at varying ϕ and temperature are presented in Table. For both materials there is a clear increase in yield from the well-ventilated to under-ventilated conditions. The rigid polyurethane foam produced slightly more CO than the polyisocyanurate at ϕ ~2.0 (240 mg gvs 225 mg g). The polyisocyanurate, on the other hand, produced slightly more HCN than the rigid foam (17 mg gvs 12 mg g). Additionally, the amount of CO generated for both materials began to taper off at ϕ 1.2-2.0 as the available oxygen becomes so low that the generation of CO becomes limited, while the yield of HCN continues to increase with equivalence ratio and temperature. The authors noted that the yields of CO during the well-ventilated testing were higher than expected for both materials, and attributed this to the possible presence of gas phase free radical quenchers, such as halogens or phosphorous containing flame retardants, which would reduce the conversion of CO to CO(Schnipper & Smith-Hansen).

In another investigation, using a steady state tube furnace, Blomqvist et al. (2007) assessed the toxic product yields of a flexible polyurethane foam that was designed for use in hospital mattresses. The test conditions were designed so that the fire conditions met the ISO 19706 (2007) fire type 2 (well-ventilated flaming fire ϕ < 0.75) and fire type 3b (post-flashover fire in large or open compartments ϕ ~2.0). The yields of toxic products followed the expected trend of being higher in the under-ventilated conditions. The average well-ventilated yield of HCN was found to be 4 mg g−1, while it was 9 mg g−1 for under-ventilated conditions. The peak HCN value reached was 10 mg per g−1 in the under-ventilated tests. The yield of CO had a wide range during the under-ventilated tests due to inconsistent flaming of the sample with yields from 100–250 mg g−1. Additionally, NO was detected during the well-ventilated tests and NH 3 during the under-ventilated tests. This agrees with the fact that oxidation of NH 3 and HCN to NO (and NO 2 , although it was not analysed in these experiments) would occur more readily during well-ventilated burning. The authors noted no significant difference in the range of yields of isocyanates detected in either well- or under-ventilated conditions with a range of 1.0-1.6 mg g−1.

Very few authors have assessed the yields of isocyanates produced during the flaming combustion of polyurethane foams and as such there is a limited amount of data available. Investigations by Hertzberg et al. (2003) used a cone calorimeter to assess the yields of amines, aminoisocyanates and isocyanates from the flaming combustion of a flexible polyurethane foam. The average combined yield of isocyanates recovered was 0.869 mg g−1 and the average yield of amines and aminoisocyanates was 0.321 mg g−1. These yields are comparable to that of the results reported by Blomqvist et al. (2007). Additionally, the authors reported a yield of 13–15 mg g−1 of CO, 1.4–1.5 mg g−1 of HCN, and 10–12 mg g−1 of NO. The authors noted that the yields of the toxicants produced an atmosphere in the tests which fell well below their Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health (IDLH) values. However, the lower yields can be attributed to the fact that the cone calorimeter is a well-ventilated scenario, estimated as ϕ ~0.7 (Schartel & Hull 2007). Taking this into consideration, the reported yields of isocyanates, aminoisocyanates and amines are still relevant, as the results of Blomqvist et al. (2007) suggests that their yields are not heavily dependent on the ventilation conditions and that the yields would likely only increase by a small amount during under-ventilated flaming.

While the link between CO yield and equivalence ratio is well established, the yield of HCN in ventilation limited conditions shows more complicated behaviour for polyurethanes. While it is evident that the HCN yield increases as a fire becomes more under-ventilated, the link between the nitrogen content of the fuel and the yield of HCN is less clear. In a series of investigations, Purser and Purser (2008a) examined the yields of HCN from a range of materials and the conversion of fuel nitrogen to HCN. A "combustion modified high resilience" flexible polyurethane foam (CMHR-PUF) and a polyisocyanurate (PIR) foam were analysed a steady state tube furnace apparatus. Tests were carried out on the CMHR-PUF at 650 °C and 850 °C and at 700 °C for the PIR in order to achieve steady flaming conditions. Both of the materials showed a clear relationship with the HCN yield increasing with ϕ. At 650 °C, the yield of HCN from the CMHR-PUF increased up to ϕ ~2.0 where it reached a peak of 14 mg of HCN per gram of polymer burned. However, when ϕ >2.0 the yield of HCN decreased, falling to 10 mg g−1 at ϕ ~2.75. At 850 °C the yield of HCN was higher with 16 mg g−1 at ϕ ~2.0. The PIR foam produced similar HCN yields to the CMHR-PUF until ϕ 1.5, after which it increased more rapidly to give a yield of 20 mg g−1 at ϕ ~1.75. This value decreased to 18 mg g−1 at ϕ ~2.0.

Elemental analysis of the polymers showed that the CMHR-FPUR contained 8.22 % nitrogen by weight and the PIR contained 6.15 % nitrogen by weight. Based on this data, the HCN recovery fraction was calculated for both materials. The PIR at ϕ 1.75 resulted in 15 % of the fuel nitrogen being recovered as HCN. At ϕ ~2.0 the CMHR-FPUR resulted in 8 % and 11 % nitrogen recovered as HCN for 650 °C and 850 °C respectively. The authors acknowledged that the lower nitrogen recovery fraction for the flexible foam could be due to fuel nitrogen being lost as isocyanates, which are known to escape into the effluent plume, while for rigid foams they are more likely to be trapped in the burning solid (Woolley & Fardell 1977). For the range of materials investigated, the authors also noted that those containing fire retardants (including the CMHR-PUF and PIR) resulted in a higher recovery fraction of fuel N as HCN. Similarly to the trend reported by Stec and Hull (2011) in well-ventilated conditions, this can be attributed to gas phase free radical quenching in the material by the chlorine present in both the CMHR-PUF and PIR (2.53 % and 3.56 % chlorine by weight, respectively).

Alongside the experiments performed in the steady state tube furnace, the PIR was also investigated in a half scale ISO 9705 room-corridor test and in a full size ISO 9705 (1993) room. During these tests, the PIR was set up as wall panels covered on two faces with aluminium foil. The cribs used in the ISO 9705 tests were constructed from PIR “sticks” which burned rapidly, albeit with minimal damage to the room. The full size ISO 9705 test resulted in well-ventilated flaming (ϕ 0.26–0.5) due to the relatively large volume of air and relatively small sample size. The full-scale test showed good accordance with the SSTF data considering the inherent unreliability of large-scale testing. The half-scale ISO 9705 experiments showed a wider range of ventilation conditions up to ϕ ~2.0. However there was significant scattering of the results with both high and low outliers (26 mg g−1 at ϕ 1.22 and 9 mg g−1 at ϕ 1.95). Taking into consideration the issues with repeatability of large-scale testing, the authors asserted that the similar trend in HCN yields supported the good relationship between the tube-furnace and large-scale results.

The increased yield of HCN for the CMHR-FPUR between 650 °C and 850 °C is likely due to the increased fragmentation of nitrogenous organic compounds in the flame, similar to the behaviour during non-flaming combustion in air reported by Woolley et al. (1972). Michal (1982) reported a similar trend at a fixed air flow rate. A sample of rigid polyurethane foam was heated in a static tube furnace with an air flow of 50 ml min−1 at a range of temperatures from 600 to 1200 °C and the yield of HCN was quantified. The results showed a HCN yield of 15.8 mg g−1 at 600 °C. The yield was much lower at 800 °C with 7.4 mg g−1 but at 1000 °C and 1200 °C the yield increased significantly to 33.9 mg g−1 and 48.1 mg g−1 respectively. The specific mass of the polyurethane sample was not provided by the author and the ventilation conditions were not clear as a result of this. The significant increased yields at 1000 °C and 1200 °C could also be attributed to pyrolysis of the nitrogenous combustion products into HCN due to the low air flow rate.

In many studies (such as those by Stec and Hull (2011), Purser and Purser (2008a) and Blomqvist et al. (2007)), the sample is raised to a fixed furnace temperature, which is further increased in the gas phase during flaming combustion. This will result in a HCN yield related that specific furnace temperature. However, during the combustion of polyurethane foams, the HCN yield is notably higher when the fire progresses from smouldering to flaming combustion. This was observed by Levin et al. (1985) when a flexible polyurethane foam was first heated at a temperature below its auto-ignition temperature, followed by flaming combustion of the remaining char and residue at a higher temperature. The authors intended to compare the HCN yields for the non-flaming and flaming combustion of the foam in a smoke chamber apparatus (as described in Levin et al. 1982) to that of a large scale test room. The test room was 2.4 × 3.0 × 3.0 m with a door (dimensions not specified) and a 1 to 2 kg slab of foam in the centre of the room. Smouldering was forced by an electrically heated resistance wire embedded in the sample and a load cell measured the mass of the sample throughout the experiment. In the smoke chamber, the highest reported yield during flaming combustion was 1.02 mg g−1. In the large scale test room, the sample smouldered for 1.5 to 2 h, resulting in a HCN yield of 1.03 mg g−1. Once the material ignited, the yield of HCN increased to 3.8 mg g−1. While the smoke chamber experiment is known to give low HCN yields, and both scenarios are well-ventilated, the yield of HCN was almost 4 times as high during flaming combustion if the sample was allowed to smoulder first.

This prompted the authors to perform further studies in order to understand why allowing the foam to smoulder increased the yield of HCN during flaming combustion. Using a cup furnace with a 200 L sampling chamber (identical in design to the one used in the smoke chamber experiments), a 3.88 g sample of foam was heated to just below its ignition temperature (370 °C) which yielded <1 mg g−1 HCN. In the chamber, 0.23 g of black char and 0.04 g of yellow oil were recovered. When the black char was burned at 600 °C, it yielded 14.95 mg of HCN (65 mg per gram of char) and the yellow oil yielded 21 mg per gram of oil. Elemental analysis of the polymer and the char showed that 80 % of the nitrogen in the polymer was lost when heated at 370 °C, but only 0.6 % was recovered as HCN when burned at 600 °C. However, while the char produced when the polymer was heated at 370 °C contained only 20 % of the total nitrogen from the polymer, 40 % of that (8 % of the total nitrogen in the polymer) was recovered as HCN when the char was burned at 600 °C. This suggests that the nitrogen in the char will more readily form HCN, even when the flaming is well-ventilated. The amount of nitrogen recovered from the char (8 %) at 600 °C is of a similar order to the results reported by Purser and Purser (2008a) in the steady state tube furnace suggesting that the amount of nitrogen in the polyurethane foam converted into HCN when the material is allowed to smoulder first before flaming is similar to that of steady under-ventilated flaming. In a report from the same laboratory, Braun et al. (1990) also reported increased HCN yields when the sample was allowed to smoulder before flaming in similar apparatus as above. In a real fire, involving cycles of growth and decay of flaming combustion, the resulting yields of HCN from the combustion of polyurethane foams are likely to be higher than predicted in some bench-scale methods as a result of this two-step decomposition mechanism.

1986 1982 6 −1 of CO when burned with very little difference in the flaming or non-flaming conditions. This was enough to cause deaths both during and post-exposure. When tested with the polyester covering the polyurethane, the yield of HCN during flaming combustion was higher than that of just the polyurethane foam on its own. However, the yield of CO was lower in both the non-flaming and flaming combustion. The overall toxicity of the combined materials was higher, and the average concentrations of the gases throughout the tests were consistently higher than that of the individual materials in both flaming and non-flaming conditions. The authors noted that the total concentrations of CO and HCN during flaming combustion were greater than the sum of those from the individual materials. It is difficult to draw more general conclusion from this work because the fuel-to-air ratio was not quantified, and the degree of mixing of fresh air and fire effluent, in the exposure chamber, is unknown. However, it does suggest that yield of toxic products is effected by covering the foam with another material during flaming combustion. Flaming/non-flaming and temperature Material CO HCN Concentration/ppm Yield/mg g−1 Concentration/ppm Yield/mg g−1 Non-flaming Polyurethane Foam 740 22.8 9 0.3 374–377 °C Polyester Fabric 2910 93 - - Polyester Fabric on Polyurethane Foam 1390 33.28 5 0.12 Flaming Polyurethane Foam 840 26.0 27 1.515 523–527 °C Polyester Fabric 2990 92.2 - - Polyester Fabric on Polyurethane Foam 3070 75.72 63 1.87 The widespread use of flexible polyurethane foams in furniture and other upholstery, where they are usually covered in some kind of fabric has prompted some authors to investigate the effects of covering the foam on the yield of toxic products. Levin et al. () investigated the toxicity of flexible polyurethane foam and a polyester fabric both separately and together. Using a smoke chamber set up for animal exposure experiments (as described in Levin et al.), the authors exposed male Fisher 344 rats in a 200 L exposure chamber to the fire effluent from the flaming and non-flaming combustion of both materials. The reported yields were extremely low for both CO and HCN, as the NBS smoke chamber apparatus is a well-ventilated fire scenario reported to give low HCN yields (Table). Flaming combustion of the polyurethane foam did not cause any animal deaths, however the non-flaming combustion resulted in deaths post-exposure. The authors noted that in both the flaming and non-flaming combustion of the polyurethane foam, the concentrations of toxicants did not reach high enough concentrations to predict deaths. The polyester fabric produced 92–93 mg gof CO when burned with very little difference in the flaming or non-flaming conditions. This was enough to cause deaths both during and post-exposure. When tested with the polyester covering the polyurethane, the yield of HCN during flaming combustion was higher than that of just the polyurethane foam on its own. However, the yield of CO was lower in both the non-flaming and flaming combustion. The overall toxicity of the combined materials was higher, and the average concentrations of the gases throughout the tests were consistently higher than that of the individual materials in both flaming and non-flaming conditions. The authors noted that the total concentrations of CO and HCN during flaming combustion were greater than the sum of those from the individual materials. It is difficult to draw more general conclusion from this work because the fuel-to-air ratio was not quantified, and the degree of mixing of fresh air and fire effluent, in the exposure chamber, is unknown. However, it does suggest that yield of toxic products is effected by covering the foam with another material during flaming combustion.

Similarly, Busker et al. (1999) tested both rigid and flexible polyurethane foams using a bespoke smoke chamber apparatus to assess the toxicity of the flaming combustion products of the materials to rats. The samples were heated at 800 °C in a static tube furnace, with the effluent being cooled to <50 °C before entering an exposure unit. The rigid polyurethane foam yielded ~55 mg g−1 CO and ~0.5 mg g−1 of HCN. The flexible foam produced ~175 mg g−1 of CO and 5 mg g−1 of HCN. The authors also noted that the presence of aldehydes was detected during the flaming combustion of the flexible foam, albeit in extremely low yields. Based on the temperature of the test, the yields of HCN are extremely low when compared with the CO yields. The authors did not specify which analytical methods were used in the quantification of the fire gases, only that they were sampled via a sampling bag.

1991a 1982 2002 1982 7 −1 of CO and 16–20 mg g−1. This is unusual as this test method is usually well-ventilated and the results are not similar to reports of other authors (such as Levin et al. 1985 1986 Test method Test conditions CO Yield/mg g−1 HCN Yield/mg g−1 NBS Cup Furnace Method 550 °C 180–210 16–20 SwRI/NIST Method 50 kW m−2 80–120 1.9–4.4 Cone Calorimeter Method Range for 35–75 kW m−2 42–80 4–5 Furniture Calorimeter 330 × 330 × 254 mm crib, 1.0 kg 80 N/a Three-compartment Room Test See description in text 100–140 5–11 Several authors have investigated the relationship between bench-scale test data and large-scale test data using polyurethane foams. Babrauskas et al. () compared a number of test methods. The authors tested a rigid polyurethane foam using a NBS cup furnace (as described in Levin et al.), a developmental method (SwRI/NIST method) which used a radiant heater on the sample which lead into a 200 L exposure chamber, a cone calorimeter (ISO 5660), a furniture calorimeter (as described in Babrauskas et al.), and a three-compartment large scale test. The three-compartment test consisted of a 2.4 × 3.7 × 2.4 m burn room, a 2.4 × 4.6 × 2.4 m corridor and a 2.4 × 3.7 × 2.4 m target room where samples would be taken. The three compartments were connected by doors and the target room contained an open vent. Although the authors intended for the bench scale test methods and the large scale test to represent post-flashover room fires, the tests resulted in CO and HCN yields that suggested the combustion conditions were not under-ventilated (Table). The test method that produced toxic product yields associated with under-ventilated flaming was the NBS cup furnace toxicity method, which yielded 180–210 mg gof CO and 16–20 mg g. This is unusual as this test method is usually well-ventilated and the results are not similar to reports of other authors (such as Levin et al.and Levin et al.).

2013 2012 2012 1354 2013 8 −1. HCN analysis was performed using infrared (IR) spectroscopy using a short path-length gas cell, which is a questionable method for the quantification of HCN due to its poor IR absorption, high potential for interferences and a poor limit of detection. This resulted in the reported HCN yields for the under-ventilated conditions being lower than expected in all of the tests. Taking this into consideration, the steady state tube furnace and the controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter both produced the highest yields of HCN in under-ventilated conditions. Test type Test variables CO Yield/mg g−1 HCN Yield/mg g−1 Radiant Furnace Initial Oxygen % 21 28 <3.0 17 36 1.0 Smoke Density Chamber Irradiance/kW m−2 Pilot 50 Unpiloted 19 3.4 50 Piloted 66 1.0 25 Piloted 43 6 Steady State Tube Furnace Temperature 650 °C (well-ventilated) 26 <3.0 825 °C (under-ventilated) 143 8.8 Controlled Atmosphere Cone Calorimeter Irradiance/kW m−2 Air Flow/L s−1 Initial Oxygen % 50 25 21 27 3.7 18 35 7.7 16 44 12.5 50 12.5 21 24 3.6 16 35 9.6 14 33 3.9 25 25 21 24 - 18 29 - 16 29 - A more recent assessment by Marsh and Gann () tested a flexible polyurethane foam with a cotton polyester cover in a range of test methods including the radiant heat apparatus (NFPA 269), the ISO 5659–2 () smoke density chamber, a controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter (ASTM E) and the steady state tube furnace (ISO/TS 19700). The authors presented a large set of data for all of the test methods, including a range of test conditions, air flow rates, oxygen concentration, and mass loadings. The reported yields for the tests performed can be found in Table. The radiant heat apparatus, smoke chamber and controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter produced much lower CO yields than would be expected for under-ventilated flaming. The steady state tube furnace produced a CO yield that was closer to what would be expected for under-ventilated conditions. The authors made this assertion based on the yield of average CO from post-flashover fires being 200 ± 9 mg g. HCN analysis was performed using infrared (IR) spectroscopy using a short path-length gas cell, which is a questionable method for the quantification of HCN due to its poor IR absorption, high potential for interferences and a poor limit of detection. This resulted in the reported HCN yields for the under-ventilated conditions being lower than expected in all of the tests. Taking this into consideration, the steady state tube furnace and the controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter both produced the highest yields of HCN in under-ventilated conditions.

The authors acknowledged that further investigation of the steady state tube furnace was warranted as in some of the testing they suspected an instrumental error, since they were unable to account for roughly two-thirds of the total carbon from the sample and detected unusually low levels of CO 2 during the under-ventilated tests. While there were some problems, the data does show that the yields of toxicants from the polyurethane foam were generally most representative of post-flashover conditions in the test methods that were designed for ventilation controlled conditions, such as the steady state tube furnace and the controlled atmosphere cone calorimeter.

As polyurethane foams have very low thermal inertia, application of heat or a small flame can be enough to ignite them. In order to reduce the ignitability, and to a less extent the surface spread of flame and peak heat release rate, fire retardants are commonly added to commercial polyurethane foams in order to meet specific regulatory demands. A comprehensive review of fire retardants and their use in polyurethane foams was published by Singh and Jain (2009). The review refers to a publication by Babrauskas et al. (1991b) wherein polyurethane containing a phosphate fire retardant caused immediate death of all of the animals. Early work by Voorhees (1975) identified what they described as ‘extreme toxicity’ of the combustion products of a phosphate fire retarded polyurethane foam. Voorhees suggested that the compound was a bicyclic phosphate compound and noted grand mal seizures followed by death in rats with a loading as low as 4 % by weight of the fire retardant. Analysis of the compound, trimethylol propane phosphate (TMPP), by Kimmerle (1976) found it to have a high acute toxicity when tested on rats. The formation of the toxicant in question was the result of an unusual reaction of the polyol in the foam, trimethylol propane, with the phosphate fire retardant in the gas phase.

Paabo and Levin (1987) reviewed the literature of the toxic product generated by the combustion of rigid polyurethane foams. The review suggested that the addition of fire retardants did not appear increase the overall combustion toxicity of polyurethane foams. However, this did not take into consideration the incapacitating effects of the release of irritant gases. A more recent review, by Levchik and Weil (2004), assessed the decomposition, combustion and fire-retardancy of polyurethanes. The author acknowledged that there is a range of contradictory results available in the literature regarding their fire toxicity. It is likely that the fire toxicity of fire retarded polyurethane materials is largely dependent on the specific fire retardant present. For example, Levin and coworkers reported that melamine-treated flexible polyurethane foam generated 6 times more HCN than an equal amount of non-melamine treated foam. However, the presence of Cu 2 O reduced the HCN generated by the flexible polyurethane foam by 70-90 % at low temperatures. The authors associated this with the effects of the Cu 2 O catalytically oxidising the HCN into N 2 , CO 2 , H 2 O and a small amount of nitrogen oxides.

Since then, Blais and Carpenter (2015) investigated a flexible polyurethane foam with and without a chloro phosphate (tris-dichloro-propyl phosphate TDCPP) fire retardant using a smoke box (ISO 5659–2 2012) to assess the toxicity. The authors asserted that fire retarding flexible polyurethane foam did not increase its acute or chronic toxicity when compared to non-fire retarded flexible foam. They also asserted that the toxicity of the fire retarded foam was less than or equal to wood on a mass/mass basis and that wood contributes significantly more to residential fires in terms of fire smoke toxicity. However, due to the poor reproducibility of smoke chamber experiments, the tendency for it to give very low HCN yields, and the fact that the experiment is well-ventilated, the reported toxicity is likely much lower than in a real fire situation. In a letter to the editor of the journal, Barbrauskas et al. (2015) questioned their methodology and noted that the authors did not address the release of HCl and its contribution to the acute fire toxicity of the fire retarded foam.

50 data has been reported directly based on animal lethality testing, however due to the declining use of animal testing in fire toxicity assessment, calculations based on standard lethality data (such as ISO 13344 1996) are more commonly used. As the toxic product yields of polyurethane foams are directly related to the ventilation conditions, so is the materials LC 50 value. Stec and Hull ( 2011 50 data for rigid polyurethane foam and polyisocyanurate foam, calculated using rat lethality data from ISO 13344 ( 1996 9 1999 Material Fire conditions ϕ Material-LC 50 /g m−3 Polyurethane Foam Smouldering - 337.2 Well-ventilated 0.69 15.7 Under-ventilated 1.24 10.3 Under-ventilated 2.00 11.4 Polyisocyanurate Foam Smouldering - 498.4 Well-ventilated 0.75 16.5 Under-ventilated 1.34 10.7 Under-ventilated 1.97 8.3 Historically, material-LCdata has been reported directly based on animal lethality testing, however due to the declining use of animal testing in fire toxicity assessment, calculations based on standard lethality data (such as ISO 13344 1996) are more commonly used. As the toxic product yields of polyurethane foams are directly related to the ventilation conditions, so is the materials LCvalue. Stec and Hull () presented material-LCdata for rigid polyurethane foam and polyisocyanurate foam, calculated using rat lethality data from ISO 13344 (). A summary of these results can be found in Table. The overall toxicity of the polyisocyanurate foam shows a clear increase as the fire became more under-ventilated, while the rigid polyurethane foam showed a slight decrease at ϕ 1.24—2.00. This slight decrease is probably within the limits of experimental error, as it does not follow the general trend shown by most materials. Using the methodology in ISO 13344, the authors also calculated the fractional effective dose (FED) of the individual toxicants sampled. The FED is expressed as the sum of contributions to toxicity from individual species and normalised to 1 g of fuel in 200 L fire effluent, as used in BS 6853 (). The calculations showed that, for both the rigid polyurethane and the polyisocyanurate, hydrogen cyanide is the major toxicant in smouldering, well-ventilated and under-ventilated flaming. The authors acknowledged that they did not include isocyanates in their calculations.

2004 50 values for 30 min exposures with 14-day post-exposure of test animals and can be found in Tables 10 11 12 Material Reference Material-LC 50 (30 min + 14 day post)/g m−3 Flexible Polyurethane Foam NFR FPU #12 Levin et al 1983a 40.0 FR FPU #11 Levin et al 1983a 40.0 No details provided Babrauskas et al 1991b 52.0 Melamine type foam Babrauskas et al 1991b 12.5 Melamine type foam with vinyl fabric Babrauskas et al 1991b 26.0 FR FPU #14 Levin et al 1983a 27.8 FR foam- 22.3 kg m−3 Braun et al 1990 26.0 FR GM-23 Farrar et al 1979 34.5 FR GM-27 Farrar et al 1979 33.1 NFR FPU #13 Levin et al 1986 40.0 NFR foam 22.3 kg/m−3 Braun et al 1990 40.0 NFR GM-21 Levin et al 1983b 38.0 NFR GM-21 Levin et al 1983b 49.5 NFR GM-21 Levin et al 1983b 40.0 NFR GM-21 Farrar et al 1979 43.2 NFR GM-25 Farrar et al 1979 37.5 NFR Foam Farrar & Galster 1980 43.2 NFR Upholstered Chairs with FPUR, cover fabric and steel frame. Foam density: 25 kg m−3 Barbrauskas et al. 1988 35.0 Rigid Polyurethane Foam NFR Foam, 25 mm thick, 96 kg m−3 Babrauskas et al 1991a 11.0 FR GM-31 Farrar et al 1979 14.2 No details provided Babrauskas et al 1991b 22.0 NFR GM-30 Levin et al 1983b 38.4 NFR GM-30 Levin et al 1983b 13.3 NFR GM-30 Levin et al 1983b 11.3 NFR isocyanurate, GM-41 Farrar et al 1979 11.4 NFR isocyanurate, GM-43 Farrar et al 1979 5.8 NFR GM-29 Farrar et al 1979 11.2 NFR GM-35 Farrar et al 1979 12.1 NFR GM-37 Farrar et al 1979 10.9 NFR GM-39, sprayed Farrar et al 1979 16.6 Material Reference Material-LC 50 (30 min + 14 day post)/g m−3 Flexible polyurethane foam No details provided Babrauskas et al. 1991b 18.0 FR upholstered chairs with FPUR padding, cover fabric and a steel frame Barbrauskas et al. 1988 23.0 Melamine type foam Babrauskas et al. 1991b 8.0 Melamine type foam with vinyl fabric Babrauskas et al. 1991b 15.0 Melamine type foam with vinyl fabric Babrauskas et al. 1991b 15.0 Rigid polyurethane foam No details provided Babrauskas et al. 1991b 14.0 Material Reference Material-LC 50 (30 min + 14 day post)/g m−3 Flexible polyurethane foam NFR FPU #12 Levin et al 1983a 37.8 NFR FPU #13 Levin et al 1986 37.0 NFR Foam: 22.3 kg m−3 Braun et al 1990 33.0 NFR GM-21 Levin et al 1983b 27.8 NFR GM-21 Levin et al 1983b 40.0 NFR GM-21 Levin et al 1983b 26.6 FR FPU #11 Levin et al 1983a 17.2 FR FPU #14 Levin et al 1983a 40.0 FR Foam: 22.3 kg m−3 Braun et al 1990 23.0 FR GM-23 Farrar et al 1979 12.6 FR GM-27 Farrar et al 1979 30.5 NFR GM-21 Farrar et al 1979 13.4 NFR GM-25 Farrar et al 1979 36.9 NFR Foam Farrar & Galster 1980 14.3 NFR GM-21: 2 PCF Anderson et al 1983 34.7 Rigid polyurethane foam NFR GM-30 Levin et al 1983b 34.0 NFR GM-30 Levin et al 1983b 39.6 NFR GM-30 Levin et al 1983b 35.1 FR GM-31 Farrar et al 1979 40.0 NFR Isocyanurate; GM-41 Farrar et al 1979 8.0 NFR isocyanurate; GM-43 Farrar et al 1979 5.0 NFR GM-29 Farrar et al 1979 40.0 NFR GM-35 Farrar et al 1979 36.7 NFR GM-37 Farrar et al 1979 36.7 NFR GM-39; sprayed Farrar et al 1979 10.9 Neviaser and Gann () compiled the toxic potency data for a range of materials including a number of fire retarded and non-fire retarded polyurethane foams. The authors compiled toxicological data from a range of primary online databases and also requests were made to collect unpublished data that were not publically available. From this, the library of data was sorted into categories of combustion/pyrolysis conditions, material/product, type of test animal and toxicological endpoint. The authors noted that a large number of the data available relating to the test conditions were vague or completely undefined. In particular, reports that used non-standard tube furnace apparatus lacked sufficient information about the conditions of the experiment and as such were not included. The data was presented as material-LCvalues for 30 min exposures with 14-day post-exposure of test animals and can be found in Tablesand