The Home Office gave survivors of the inferno, who were living in the country illegally, a window of protection from deportation to encourage them to come forward to authorities.

BMELawyers4Grenfell’s comments come as campaigners for survivors and victims of the blaze, which killed at least 80 people on June 14, accused the government of a “cover up”.

The one-year immigration amnesty for undocumented residents of Grenfell Tower is a “travesty” and will jeopardise the public inquiry into the fire, lawyers said as the deadline for signing up was extended.

It followed concerns that valuable evidence about the events surrounding the fire would be lost without their cooperation.

Those wishing to benefit from the arrangement had until August 31 to apply, but on Thursday it was announced the deadline had been extended to November 30.

Ismet Rawat, from BMELawyers4Grenfell, told HuffPost UK that she is not aware of anyone who has taken up the offer of the 12-month amnesty.

“We’ve not heard of a single person taking this up,” she said.

Campaign group Justice4Grenfell also said it “seriously” doubts many survivors had taken up the offer. The Home Office said it would release information about how many had signed up at a later date.

BMELawyers4Grenfell is calling for a full amnesty for all undocumented residents of Grenfell Tower and others who may have been in the building at the time of the fire from the outset.

“The one-year so-called amnesty was a travesty, providing no real protection and leaving any such residents at peril of immediate deportation once that 12 months ended,” Rawat said.

There are two reasons why undocumented residents of Grenfell Tower should be given full amnesty, she added.

Firstly, it is the “right thing to do on a human level”, Rawat said. Also, it could have an impact on the integrity of the inquiry.

Sir Martin Moore-Bick, the retired judge leading the inquiry into the disaster, urged Theresa May to consider the long-term immigration status of survivors.

He wrote to the Prime Minister that he feared his investigation would be weaker without their evidence.