ES News Email Enter your email address Please enter an email address Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email address is invalid Email cannot be used. Try another or register with your social account

A pastor has blamed the “disgusting” treatment of poor people in Notting Hill for the fatal tower block inferno and said residents had been “neglected” in the area.

Danny Vance, an Associate Pastor at Notting Hill Community Church, said the deadly blaze at Grenfell Tower would not have happened in nearby “£5million flats” and that he wasn’t surprised by the fire.

He also pointed to authorities ignoring complaints from residents over fire safety, with the 24-storey block of flats undergoing a £10m renovation in May 2016.

Al least six people were killed when an inferno engulfed the 24-storey tower block in the early hours of Wednesday morning.

Evacuation from Notting Hill Grenfell Tower Fire - In pictures 21 show all Evacuation from Notting Hill Grenfell Tower Fire - In pictures 1/21 The moment a resident is carried out of the Grenfell Tower block by fire bridage and riot police carrying shields Sky News 2/21 Members of the public receive treatment at the scene of a huge fire at Grenfell tower block in White Cit Guilhem Baker/LNP 3/21 A local resident is carried to receive some medical aid at a community centre close to a fire that has engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower PA 4/21 Firefighters rest as they take a break in battling a massive fire that raged in a 27-floor high-rise apartment building in London AP 5/21 Sandwiches are handed out to local residents close to a fire that has engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower PA 6/21 Resident Michael Paramasivan and his daughter Thea Kavanagh, 5, who managed to escape a fire that engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London PA 7/21 A woman who is awaiting news of her friend who was caught up in a fire that engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower PA 8/21 A man comforts a boy after a tower block was severly damaged by a serious fire, in north Kensington, West Londo Reuters 9/21 Two men hug within the security cordon as Grenfell Tower is engulfed by fire AFP/Getty Images 10/21 Young children wear protective face masks near the burning 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images 11/21 A police officer helps to evacuate a local resident from close to the scene of a serious fire in a tower block at Latimer Road in West London Reuters 12/21 Local resident Amanda Fernandez reacts following a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower EPA 13/21 People terrified for their friends and family trapped inside Grenfell Tower @ellenwhinnett/News Corp Australia 14/21 Women donate clothes to a stall which has been set up to help people near the burning 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West Londo Getty Images 15/21 Eddie Daffarn wrapped in a towel speaks on a mobile phone near the scene of a serious fire in a tower block, in north Kensington, West London Reuters 16/21 A woman comforts a boy after a tower block was severly damaged by a serious fire, in north Kensington, West London Reuters 17/21 Firefighters prepare to enter the building to tackle the flames EPA 18/21 woman reacts following a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower EPA 19/21 Emergency service responders and local people at a cordon surrounding the fire that has engulfed the 27-storey Grenfell Tower in west London PA 20/21 Volunteers bring food and water to local residents following a huge fire at the Grenfell Tower EPA 21/21 A women reacts following the blaze at t Grenfell Tower on Latimer Road Alex Lentati

Mr Vance told the I Newspaper: “The disparity in this country between rich and poor is disgusting.

“This would not have happened in those £2m, £5m flats around the corner.

“In 2012 they were told they were deficient and their fire checks were out of date and they did nothing, they did absolutely nothing.”

The Grenfell Action Group have since said they had “predicted a catastrophe” but claimed safety warnings were ignored.

In a chilling blog post just seven months ago, the group said “only a catastrophic event” would make concerns heard.

The charred wreck of the Notting Hill tower block is set to be examined to establish the cause of the fire.

The group claimed it had repeatedly warned Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO,) which manages the social housing block, and the council, which owns the building.

Mr Vance added: “This isn’t a surprise to me. Anyone who’s worked anywhere in the inner city – this isn’t a surprise. The poor are constantly neglected.

“When I started in Peckham there were 10 youth centres. By the time I left there was two. “Things like this are going to keep happening if the poor are ignored in this city.”

Horrifying accounts of residents jumping from windows have since emerged, while numerous Londoners have began donating clothes and food to the victims.

The tower, on Latimer Road, is part of the Lancaster West Estate, a social housing complex of 1,000 homes.

It is believed several hundred people could have been inside when the fire broke out.