A resident who managed to escape from the 15th floor of London’s Grenfell Tower as a fire engulfed the building said he feels “lucky to be alive”.

Christos Fairbairn said he “will never forget” the harrowing experience and “will never live in a tower block again”.

He added that he was “tripping over bodies” in the darkness as he tried to make his way to the stairs.

The 41-year-old, who moved into the west London tower block two years ago, said he was watching television when he heard an alarm go off and saw smoke starting to seep into his flat.

“I rang the fire service and they told me to get out,” Mr Fairbairn told the BBC. “I tried to leave the flat three times, and each time the smoke was too thick. I started to panic. I began banging on the window shouting: ‘Help me, help me, I’m stuck’.

“I tried to open the window, but I burnt my hand on the melted plastic. I could see police outside and people just standing there. It felt like they were just watching me.

“Then I realised if I don’t go, I would die here.”

He then wrapped a wet jumper around himself and ran out the door.

Grenfell tower fire







42 show all Grenfell tower fire

















































































1/42 Local residents watch as Grenfell Tower is engulfed by fire Getty Images

2/42 London Fire Brigade said there has been a number of fatalities from the blaze Rex Features

3/42 The fire was first reported in the early hours of Wednesday and continued into the morning Rex Features

4/42 A local resident sees the fire over the rooftops @Ebajgora

5/42 A firefighter reacts at the scene of the blaze Getty Images

6/42 Residents watch as the blaze continues Getty Images

7/42 More than 200 firefighters have been fighting the blaze PA

8/42 London Mayor Sadiq Khan has declared the fire a major incident Getty Images

9/42 Police and fire services attempted to evacuate the concrete block of flats Getty Images

10/42 A woman runs to assist paramedics working at the fire at the Grenfell Tower Getty Images

11/42 Smoke rises from the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 story Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London in the early hours of Wednesday morning Getty Images

12/42 Fire fighters tackle the 24-storey building in West London Getty Images

13/42 Ambulances are stationed nearby Getty Images

14/42 Paramedics arrive with oxygen Getty Images

15/42 Emergency services believe it will take some time to establish the cause of the fire

16/42 Tens of people have been taken to five different hospitals across London Getty Images

17/42 A man comforts a boy after the tower block was severely damaged Reuters

18/42 Firefighters stand amid debris in a childrens playground nearby Reuters

19/42 Firefighters are stationed at the building Getty Images

20/42 Smoke engulfs Grenfell tower Rex Features

21/42 Lots of people donating water, food and clothing to St Clement's church for the residents of Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road Samuel Osborne

22/42 A man speaks to a fire fighter after a huge fire engulfed the 24 story Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

23/42 According to the London Fire Brigade (LFB), 40 fire engines and 200 firefighters are working to put out the blaze. Residents in the tower were evacuated and a number of people were treated for a range of injuries EPA

24/42 A resident of Grenfell Tower is trapped as smoke billows from the window after a fire engulfed the building Getty Images

25/42 Members of the emergency services work at the scene of a huge blaze which engulfed Grenfell Tower, a residential tower block in Latimer Road Getty Images

26/42 According to the London Fire Brigade (LFB), 40 fire engines and 200 firefighters are working to put out the blaze EPA

27/42 Fire fighters tackle the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 story Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

28/42 The burnt facade of Grenfell Tower, the night after the fire in Latimer Road, West London REUTERS/Neil Hall

29/42 Local residents gather at a community centre near Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road REUTERS/Toby Melville

30/42 A resident in a nearby building watches smoke rise from Grenfell Tower in Latimer Road, West London AP

31/42 Police and rescue services operate near the fire at Grenfell Tower, a 24-storey apartment block in Latimer Road EPA

32/42 A man stands amid debris on the A40 after a serious fire in a tower block at Latimer Road in West London REUTERS/Toby Melville

33/42 A view of the empty A40 highway after it was closed in both directions, due to the proximity of the fire at Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road EPA

34/42 Smoke rises from the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

35/42 Bodies are removed from the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Rick Findler/PA Wire

36/42 Bodies are removed from the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Rick Findler/PA Wire

37/42 Provisions on tables at the Westway Sports Centre close to the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Jack Hardy/PA

38/42 Beds are laid out in the Westway Sports Centre close to the scene after a fire engulfed the 24-storey Grenfell Tower in west London Jack Hardy/PA Wire

39/42 A pile of donated clothes, sleeping bags and water lie next to a police cordon near the burning the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

40/42 Signs asking for donations are seen outside the Notting Hill methodist Chruch Getty Images

41/42 Smoke rises from the building after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty Images

42/42 A man is rescued by fire fighters after a huge fire engulfed the 24 storey residential Grenfell Tower block in Latimer Road, West London Getty

“The smoke was black and it was so hot I couldn’t breathe, but I kept going,” he said.

Mr Fairbairn said he was “tripping over bodies” in the darkness as he tried to make his way to the stairs.

“On one of the floors I tripped badly and fell, as I looked up I saw the face of a dead man. I can still picture him now.”

By the time Mr Fairbairn made it to the third or fourth floor, he says he was choking and unable to breathe.

Brother of Grenfell fire victim: Residents flagging dangerous conditions were repeatedly ignored

“I started to feel faint. I collapsed and that’s when I felt a firefighter grab me,” he said.

After making it out of the building, he was taken to hospital and treated for smoke inhalation.

“I was crying and having flashbacks. Now I’m left with nothing and nowhere to live,” Mr Fairbairn said. “I can’t believe I am alive. I will never forget what happened and how traumatising it was.

“I know I will never live in a tower block again.”