To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

A video has emerged showing just how desperate people were to escape the Grenfell Tower fire in West London.

One of the residents several storeys up made a rope out of bed sheets in a bid to escape from the intense blaze that has all but destroyed the building.

Dozens feared dead in huge tower block fire in West London

Several hundred people are feared to have been in the block of flats when it went up in the early hours of this morning.

An acrid column of smoke could be seen rising from the building shortly before 7am.

The charred structure still had pockets of flame rising from several storeys as the desperate effort to bring the blaze under control continued.

Schoolboy Omar Kalam, 11, was standing anxiously at the emergency service cordon with father Walid, 44.

A resident waves a cloth to try and attract attention in the tower (Picture: AFP)

A man waves his shirt in desperation to be rescued (Picture: LNP)

‘My brother has friends and they live in there,’ he said. ‘I’m not sure if they are all right yet.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

Parents from nearby Kensington Aldridge Academy, where Omar attends, had been told the school was closed, his father said.

An action group at a west London tower block ravaged by fire have said their warnings fell on ‘deaf ears’ after highlighting safety concerns about the block.

The cause of the blaze at the Grenfell tower, north Kensington, is not known, but a blog post from the Grenfell Action Group from November 2016 said ‘only a catastrophic event’ would expose issues residents had.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Several hundred people would have been in the block when the fire was reported at 1.15am on Wednesday, while 30 have been taken to hospital.

The group said there was one entry and exit to Grenfell Tower during improvement works at the block in Latimer Road and it had issues with evacuation procedures at the building.

Following the fire, the group posted: ‘All our warnings fell on deaf ears and we predicted that a catastrophe like this was inevitable and just a matter of time.’

The group claimed access to the building was ‘severely restricted’ for emergency services and other vehicles and that residents were advised to stay in their flats in case of fire.

Sorry, this video is no longer available.

Police man a security cordon as a huge fire engulfs the Grenfell Tower early June 14, 2017 in west London. The massive fire ripped through the 27-storey apartment block in west London in the early hours of Wednesday, trapping residents inside as 200 firefighters battled the blaze. Police and fire services attempted to evacuate the concrete block and said “a number of people are being treated for a range of injuries”, including at least two for smoke inhalation. / AFP PHOTO / DANIEL LEAL-OLIVASDANIEL LEAL-OLIVAS/AFP/Getty Images