Rydon lands Grenfell Tower refurbishment

July 2016

Rydon has completed the refurbishment to Grenfell Tower for Kensington & Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation (KCTMO), upgrading the 24-storey 1970s building as part of a £67m borough-wide regeneration.

The £10m project included extensive remodelling of the bottom four floors creating nine additional new homes, improved communal facilities for the residents, and improved spaces for two local businesses. Externally, rain screen cladding, replacement windows and curtain wall façades have been fitted giving the building a fresher, modern look. All of the remodelling & refurbishment works were completed with residents still in occupation on the upper twenty floors.

Dale Youth Boxing Club, which has produced some of the UK’s best boxing talent including Olympic Gold medallist James DeGale and former European, British and Commonwealth super-middleweight champion George Groves, is based within Grenfell Tower. The work has provided the club with improved facilities that will hopefully produce many more champions of the future.

Grenfell Nursery was relocated to a larger and more convenient space on the ground floor next to a new outside play area.

Internally, a new, more efficient communal heating system and bespoke smoke extract and ventilation system were fitted. The works achieved a BREEAM Good rating and Rydon helped the client secure eco funding grants.

Cllr Nick Paget-Brown, the leader of the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, visited the site in May and said:

“It is remarkable to see first-hand how the cladding has lifted the external appearance of the tower and how the improvements inside people’s homes will make a big difference to their day-to-day lives”

“As well as this investment, in a relatively short space of time Grenfell Tower residents have benefitted from a brand new academy and leisure centre, which represents our ongoing commitment to North Kensington.”

Click here for more information on Rydon’s refurbishment projects.