INSULATION fitted to Grenfell Tower gave off a highly toxic cyanide gas which may have led to the deaths of some of the 79 confirmed victims, it's been claimed.

An expert has claimed insulation boards fitted to the outside of the building during a previous makeover produce a deadly gas when they burn.

Jason Hawkes It's been claimed burning insulation boards could have given off deadly fumes

Splash News It's claimed there could have been enough cyanide gas to kill those insde

Their positioning meant every flat could have been filled with enough gas to kill those inside.

At least three of those injured in the fire have been treated with an antidote for hydrogen cyanide poisoning in hospital.

However, it's feared the number of those affected could be higher.

The gas could have incapacitated some residents, but linking it to the cause of death may be impossible because of the condition of the victims.

London's King's College Hospital confirmed to Sky News that three of the 12 patients it received from the fire were treated with the hydrogen cyanide antidote Cyanokit.

An initial 68 patients were taken to six hospitals across London, with 18 receiving critical care and some

The insulation fitted to Grenfell Tower was made of Polyisocyanurate (PIR) - a rigid plastic foam sandwiched between two sheets of aluminium foil.

The boards were fitted behind the cladding that was installed to improve the appearance of the building.

Richard Hull, professor of chemistry and fire science at the University of Central Lancashire, told Sky the gas produced by the insulation when it burned may have been deadly.

MOST READ IN NEWS 'SHOULD I EAT IT?' The final words of rugby player left paralysed by eating slug as a dare EASTER MOANDAY UK set for 15cm of snow as freezing temperatures and torrential rain strike TOT TRAGEDY Baby girl dies after suffering cardiac arrest at West Midlands Safari Park PAW-FECT PALS Boy bullied for different coloured eyes and cleft lip adopts identical cat DUMPED BY POST Meghan ended marriage 'out of the blue' by moving out and POSTING rings back 'HE'S LIKE JESUS' Boy, 2, wakes up from coma just as family agree to turn off life support

"The outside wall of the building had 150mm of PIR foam (fitted), and once the fire had spread to that every flat would have its own source of PIR foam, which would have produced enough hydrogen cyanide to kill all the people in that flat," he said.

Professor Hull co-authored a leading study in 2011 into the fire toxicity of six insulation materials which was published in the Energy & Building journal.

The study established that PIR was the most toxic.

Professor Hull said: "It's been an accident waiting to happen and unfortunately we've got to the stage now where the accident has happened and we're standing here saying 'I told you so'.

"It would have been much better if people had listened to us earlier on when we published the report."

Reuters The gas could have incapacitated some residents

The insulation board was manufactured by Celotex.

When contacted for comment, Celotex referred Sky News to a statement on its website published last Friday.

It said: "As with the rest of the nation our thoughts continue to be with those affected by the terrible fire at Grenfell Tower in London.

"On Wednesday, as soon as we were able to, we confirmed that our records showed a Celotex product (RS5000) was purchased for use in refurbishing the building.

"This product has a fire rating classification of Class 0, in accordance with British Standards.

"We will of course assist the relevant authorities fully with any enquiries they have."