Owners of FF175BP or FF175BG models should contact company after one was identified as cause of tower block blaze

Hotpoint has urged owners of its fridge-freezers to check their model numbers for safety reasons after one was identified as the initial cause of the Grenfell Tower fire.

A spokesman said Hotpoint was working with the authorities after its FF175BP model was found to have started the devastating blaze last week. He urged consumers who believe they own that model or the FF175BG to contact the company on a freephone hotline or visit the website to register their details.

“Words cannot express our sorrow at this terrible tragedy,” the spokesman said. “We offer our most profound condolences to the victims, those who have lost loved ones, homes, and possessions, and to their friends and families. Our thoughts and prayers are with all those involved, including the emergency services who risked their lives to extinguish the blaze and rescue those in the building.

“We are working with the authorities to obtain access to the appliance so that we can assist with the ongoing investigations. Under these circumstances, we are unable to speculate on further details at this time. We are addressing this as a matter of utmost urgency and assisting the authorities in any way we can. We will provide additional updates as our investigations progress.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest The Hotpoint FF175BP fridge-freezer. Composite: Hotpoint

The government said it had ordered an immediate examination of the fridge-freezer by technical experts to establish the cause of the blaze, adding that at this stage there was no specific reason for consumers to switch off their fridge-freezers.

Greg Clark, the business secretary, said: “The safety of consumers is paramount. The device is being subject to immediate and rigorous testing to establish the cause of the fire. I have made clear to the company that I will expect them to replace any item without delay if it is established that there is a risk in using them.”

The Hotpoint FF175BP was manufactured between March 2006 and July 2009 and has not previously been recalled. Tests will be carried out to establish whether a product recall is necessary, the government said.

Hotpoint said a total of 64,000 units were made over the three years, adding that the number of appliances in use today would be lower because of normal product obsolescence.

The model was made by Indesit under the Hotpoint brand; both are part of Whirlpool, whose UK head office is in Peterborough.

A spokeswoman for the trading standards arm of Peterborough city council said it had contacted Whirlpool. “We have been in touch with the company and asked questions but the government is taking the lead on this and would be in charge of any product recall decision,” she said.

Hotpoint is expected to give customers further updates about what action it will take, and the government advised people to follow standard safety advice by not overloading plugs, ensuring sockets are not damaged, and checking cables and leads are in good condition.

The London fire brigade concluded last year that a faulty Indesit tumble dryer was the cause of a serious tower block blaze in Shepherd’s Bush, west London.

Whirlpool has been replacing or repairing an estimated 3.8m potentially faulty machines – made under the Hotpoint, Indesit, Creda Swan and Proline brands – across the UK after identifying a fire risk safety defect in November 2015, caused when excess fluff touches the heating element. It did not issue a product recall, telling customers they could continue to use their tumble dryer while waiting for the modification, provided it was not left unattended.

However, it changed that advice in February this year, telling owners of the potentially dangerous machines to unplug the appliances and stop using them until they were repaired.