Coroner opens and adjourns inquests into deaths of Sakineh and Fatemeh Afrasiabi, Mariem Elgwahry and Deborah Lamprell

The inquests of four people who died in the Grenfell Tower fire were opened at Westminster coroner’s court on Wednesday.

Iranian-born sisters Sakineh Afrasiabi, 65, and Fatemeh Afrasiabi, 59, were both identified by their dental records after their remains were found on the 23rd floor of the tower block. They lived in an 18th-floor flat after moving to Britain in 1997.

The court heard that the body of Mariem Elgwahry, 27, had been found on the 23rd floor next to her mother, Eslah Elgwahry, 64, whose inquest opened last month. The women lived on the 19th floor. Mariem was also identified by her dental records.

The body of Deborah Lamprell, 45, was also found on the 23rd floor, and was identified by dental records. Her family described her as “a wonderful, precious daughter, always smiling and helping others”.

The provisional cause of death for all four women was given as “consistent with the effects of fire”.



The coroner, Fiona Wilcox, adjourned the inquests to allow the public inquiry and police investigation to proceed.

She has opened and adjourned inquests into 52 victims, although police believe that at least 80 people died in the blaze.

Wilcox told the court: “Identifications are becoming increasingly difficult. At the moment, we are still managing to identify people based on proper primary identification.”

So far, victims have been identified using evidence such as DNA, fingerprints or dental records.

Officials believe that some of those who died in the fire on 14 June may never be formally identified.



The coroner said there was one further inquest scheduled for next week, that of Ernie Vital, 50, who was officially identified on Wednesday.

Vital, who lived on the 16th floor, died in the blaze with his mother, 68-year-old Marjorie Vital, whose inquest opened last month.

Vital’s family said in a statement: “Ernie was a polite 50-year-old man and he worked in the catering industry. He was a creative individual who pursued a creative life.

“He was a proud, humble, mature and independent man. He was a loyal son and a law-abiding citizen who maintained good relationships with all those he met in society.

“He will be remembered as a kind, sensitive and caring person with a warm-hearted smile. His pursuit of happiness has been abruptly and dramatically stopped by the Grenfell Tower tragedy. His family and friends will miss him dearly.”

His mother, a former textile worker, has been described as a “kind-hearted” woman who dedicated her life to her children.