Following the Metropolitan Police Service’s statement that a Hotpoint FF175BP fridge freezer has been identified as the initial source of the Grenfell Tower fire, the government has ordered an immediate examination of the unit by technical experts to establish the cause of the incident.

This product, which was manufactured between 2006 and 2009, has not been subject to product recalls and this testing will establish whether any further action is required.

Consumers who believe they may own a Hotpoint fridge freezer model number FF175BP (white) or FF175BG (grey) should call Whirlpool Corporation’s freephone hotline on 0800 316 3826 or visit www.hotpointservice.co.uk/fridgefreezer to register their details for further updates.

At this stage there is no specific reason for consumers to switch off their fridge freezer pending further investigation.

Greg Clark, Secretary of State for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) said:

The safety of consumers is paramount. The device is being subject to immediate and rigorous testing to establish the cause of the fire. I have made clear to the company that I will expect them to replace any item without delay if it is established that there is a risk in using them.

Customers can expect further updates from the manufacturer about the action it will take in relation to this product and are advised to follow standard safety advice, not overload plugs, ensure sockets are not damaged and check cables and leads are in good condition.

Business Minister Margot James wrote to trade associations representing all major household appliance manufacturers last week outlining the government’s expectation of action by their members should a household appliance be found to have played a part in the Grenfell Tower fire.

People with concerns about product safety can also call the Citizens Advice consumer service line on 03454 04 05 06 or our helpline on 0300 123 1016. The government website on product recalls, which will be updated should further action on the product be necessary, can be found at www.gov.uk/productrecall.