The Queen acknowledged a 'sombre national mood' as she marked her official birthday. Credit: PA

The Queen has marked her official birthday with the famous Trooping the Colour ceremony, as she acknowledged the "succession of terrible tragedies" in recent weeks. A minute's silence was held at the beginning of the parade for the victims of the Grenfell Tower block fire. Members of the Royal family watched the centuries-old military spectacle of might and splendour marching on Horse Guard's Parade.

The Queen and her family at the ceremony. Credit: PA

Crowds enjoy a celebratory flypast over Buckingham Palace. Credit: PA

The event is an important day in the Armed Forces' calendar where the families and friends of the officers and soldiers on parade, proudly watch the ceremony. Along with the Grenfell Tower fire - which has left at least 30 people dead, with the number expected to rise - and recent terror attacks in London and Manchester, the mood of the parade was more sombre than in previous years. In a birthday statement, Queen Elizabeth II acknowledged the "sombre national mood", following the "succession of terrible tragedies".

The central London celebrations were attended by large crowds. Credit: PA

The Trooping the Colour ceremony at Horse Guards Parade. Credit: PA

The Prime Minister normally attends Trooping the Colour, but Theresa May, who has faced criticism over her handling of the Grenfell Tower block fire, was not seen at the event. A Downing Street spokesperson said: "The Prime Minister is this morning chairing a cross-Government meeting to ensure everything possible is being done to support those affected by the Grenfell tragedy. "Afterwards, she will meet a group of residents, victims, volunteers and community leaders in Number 10. The PM has sent her best wishes to HM Queen on the event of her birthday."

Members of the Household cavalry march on the Mall. Credit: PA

In total 1,600 soldiers and 244 horses from the Household Division were on parade during the ceremony. The Colour being paraded on Horse Guards this year was the flag of the 1st Battalion Irish Guards.

The Trooping the Colour ceremony is held at Horse Guards Parade, King Henry VIII's former jousting yard. Credit: PA