The residents of Grenfell Tower in west London had warned of the potentially devastating effects of a fire before last night’s blaze which caused at least 17 deaths and scores of injuries

The 24-storey building in north Kensington, which had only recently undergone an £8.6 million refurbishment overseen by Studio E Architects, was reported to be on fire just before 1am this morning.

Around 200 firefighters and 45 fire engines attended the ‘major incident’ at the 120-flat concrete block - originally built in 1974 but given new windows and aluminium composite cladding with thermal insulation less than two years ago.

However residents under the banner Grenfell Action Group had raised numerous concerns about fire safety. A blog posted earlier today by the group reads: ’Regular readers of this blog will know that we have posted numerous warnings in recent years about the very poor fire safety standards at Grenfell Tower and elsewhere in [the borough].’

’All our warnings fell on deaf ears and we predicted that a catastrophe like this was inevitable and just a matter of time.’

Eye witnesses who escaped from the block said they had not heard any fire alarms within the apartments and that those in the corridors were barely audible. It is understood around 500 people were in the building when the blazes started on the fourth floor.

One resident told the BBC that ’had he and his family stayed in the flat, which is what they had been told to do in the event of a fire, we would have perished’.

Another eyewitness, George Clarke, the architect and presenter of Channel 4 TV programme Amazing Spaces, told BBC Radio 5 Live: ’I’m getting covered in ash, that’s how bad it is. I’m 100 metres away and I’m absolutely covered in ash.

’It’s so heartbreaking, I’ve seen someone flashing their torches at the top level and they obviously can’t get out.’

In 2009 poor design was blamed for contributed to deaths of six people, including three children, in the 12-storey Lakanal House, Camberwell which residents had repeatedly called to be made safe or demolished.

The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea has said it will ’the cause of the fire will be fully investigated’.

Conservative MP Mike Penning, a former firefighter and fire minister, told BBC News the UK that he believed the cladding used on the exterior of the building was responsible for spreading the fire.

He said: ’The cladding was clearly spreading the fire …We need to find out what went on’.

The firm which provided the cladding for Grenfell was Harley Facades.

A spokesperson from Studio E Architects said: ‘We are terribly shocked by the whole event. We have nothing else to add at this point.

‘It’s still on-going and it would be inappropriate to make a comment or speculate.’

The spokesperson said that the practice will be releasing a longer statement in due course.

She added that the firm’s website had crashed as a result of heavy traffic – and that the practice was working to get it back online – rather than as a result of the firm intentionally taking it down.

Show Fullscreen 30 September 2014 - approved cladding material palette, Studio E Architects 30 September 2014 - approved cladding material palette for lower levels, Studio E Architects

It’s very early and we should avoid speculating, but we in light of Lakanal House we have to ask questions about the refurbishment. I hear reports of a recent fire at Trellick Tower which was contained correctly by compartmentation. Yet this fire clearly overcame that compartmentation very quickly and questions have to be asked why. Another report spoke of recent works to the gas riser - if this was leaking then that would certainly help to explain the speed and ferocity. No doubt sprinklers will be mentioned again but if the cladding or the gas rider were at fault then they would have little effect. I have seen extracts of a fire risk assessment and talk of combustible material stored in the common walkways which suggests poor overall management. Firstly this is a disaster - as is the case with most disasters - that should not have happened. I’ve designed multi-storey residential blocks - both private and council - and I live in a converted residential block with 168 flats when in London. This has designed-in fire precaution and means of escape measures as well as self-closing four-hour fire resistant doors. The fire alarm system, that should be throughout at Grenfell Tower, should have given immediate warning of a fire in any individual flat. If that worked there would have been ample time for everyone to safely evacuate the building. That clearly did not seem to happen. Having been in a fire disaster, although on a ship, I know the first sign of smoke or a fire you get out into the open air as quickly as you can. From what can be seen from the TV the fire started low down - some said the second floor, others the fourth floor - but it appears from a corner flat and the fire then spread rapidly as you would expect upwards and spread horizontally across all upper floors.The reports indicate it spread at great speed until the whole block [was engulfed] apart from a small number on the lower floors which appear to be still largely intact. ’How did the fire spread so rapidly upwards without adequately warning the resident in their beds’ The key investigation will be how the fire which started in one flat (as that appears to be the case) spread so rapidly upwards without adequately warning the resident in their beds and enabling them to escape in safety. It appears that the 1970s block was very recently renovated. That appears to have included new windows and cladding. There is always the risk, and there have been cases in the past, that the design of the replacement windows and the cladding did not provide the necessary fire checks to prevent fire spreading externally from one flat to the one above. However the nature of this fire from what I have seen on TV that does not appear to be the case. Although I wouldn’t rule it out. As for the stability of the block this is unlikely to be affected by this fire - intense and hot as it was - as the structure is almost a reinforced concrete frame with a central concrete lift shaft which should have remained. In the case of New York’s Twin Towers the main structure was steel and the heat generated by the explosion of aviation fuel created heat at such a level that the steel structure on the floors where the planes hit, bent and the top floors above collapsed which then caused the blocks to completely collapse. Clearly today’s disaster will make everyone involved in the design and procurement of high-rise buildings think more critically about the safety of occupants. And while it is too early to determine the cause, questions need to be asked about what preventative measures were in place in this block. Did each flat have a fire extinguisher to provide a first line of defence in the event of a small electrical fire? The cost for the entire block of flats would be less than £4,000 (150 flats x £25 = £3,750). As smoke inhalation is one of the greatest threats to persons escaping residential fires were occupants provided with smoke escape masks – a family of four could be provided with the mask below for less than £100 per flat - £15,000 for the entire block. It is incumbent on everyone involved in the design and procurement of residential apartment buildings to further examine ways of reducing the risk to occupants.

Social media reaction

The spread of the fire is not a result of the staircase it is something to do with cladding and complete absence of sprinklers — David Nicholson-Cole (@dnicholsoncole) June 14, 2017

A night I'll never ever forget. Truly horrific. A post shared by George Clarke (@mrgeorgeclarke) on Jun 14, 2017 at 1:59am PDT

#Glenfell Tower drawings. Single stairs for 120 flats in 24 floors. Flats started on 4th floor, lower ones added in remodelling. #LondonFire pic.twitter.com/5Gl3JqILlD — Mark Ashley (@themarkashley) June 14, 2017

Quick Google shows new cladding was alu composite panels. https://t.co/R1Z7JSCN2V. Refurb designed by Studio E. — Hana Loftus (@hanaloftus) June 14, 2017

Total speculation but never seen a building so evenly on fire. Cladding must be to blame. Horror — Kieran Gaffney (@konishigaffney) June 14, 2017

Does anyone know how they got away without fire lobbies in on upper floors at #GrenfellTower during refurb? Is this Building Regs compliant? — Russell Curtis (@russellcurtis) June 14, 2017