Police believe the final death toll of the Grenfell Tower fire in west London is 71, including a stillborn baby. The bodies of those that died in the June blaze have been recovered and identified, police said. Victoria King, 71, and her 40-year-old daughter Alexandra Atala were formally identified as the final two victims, Scotland Yard said.

Victoria King and her daughter Alexandra also perished in the tower blaze Credit: Metropolitan Police

Here is what we know about others confirmed to have died in the tragedy. Not all of the victims have been named by police at the request of their families.

Majorie and Ernie Vital

Majorie Vital Credit: Metropolitan Police

Majorie Vital, 68, and her son Ernie, 50, lived on the 16th floor but died on the 23rd. The former textile worker was a described as a "kind-hearted" woman who dedicated her life to her children. Mr Vital, who worked in catering, was a "proud, humble,mature and independent man", a "loyal son" and a"law-abiding citizen", his family said.

The Kedir family

Hashim Kedir and his daughter Firdaws Hashim Credit: Metropolitan Police

Hashim Kedir, 44, died alongside his wife Nura Jemal, 35,daughter Firdows Hashim, 12, and sons Yahya Hashim, 13, and Yaqub Hashim, six. Family described Mr Kedir as "everybody's favourite" who could "make friends so easily". Mrs Jemal was described as "vibrant, full of life andpositive-minded", while their daughter was "the most intelligent,wise and eloquent girl", Family said Yahya was "kind, handsome,pure-hearted and sweet", and Yaqub was "our energetic, sporty, funny, smart and cute".

Yahya Hasim was one of the child victims of the Grenfell fire. Credit: Met Police

Jeremiah and Zainab Deen

Jeremiah and Zainab Deen Credit: Met Police

Zainab Deen was in her flat with her two-year-old son Jeremiah when the fire broke out. They were found dead at each other's side. Originally from Sierra Leone, Ms Deen was described as a "beautiful, loving lady" when a group of friends gathered near the tower to pay tribute to her. In a tribute issued by police, Jeremiah's family said of him: "You spent a moment in our arms, but you will last a lifetime in our hearts".

Isaac Paulos

Issac's body was found on the 13th floor Credit: Met Police

Five-year-old Isaac was last seen trying to escape the blaze with neighbours and family, but reportedly got lost in the smoke. He choked to death on fumes, an inquest heard. His family said: "We will all miss our kind, energetic, generous little boy. He was such a good boy who was loved by his friends and family. "We will miss him forever, but we know God is looking after him now and that he is safe in heaven."

The Belkadi family

Four members of the family of five were killed in the blaze. Farah Hamdan, 31, and her husband Omar Belkadi, 32, died alongside six-month-old Leena Belkadi. Their eight-year-old daughter Malak died in hospital. Her sister Tazmin, six, is believed to have survived.

Mohammad al-Haj Ali

Mohammad al-Haj Ali was the first Grenfell victim to be identified.

Syrian refugee Mohammad al-Haj Ali was the first person to be identified as having died in the fire. The 23-year-old was with his brother Omar when the fire broke out but returned to his 14th floor flat after being overwhelmed by the smoke. Mr al-Haj Ali was then trapped and knowing he was going to die desperately tried to call his family in Syria. His last message read: "The fire is here now, goodbye." A post-mortem found his injuries were consistent with jumping out the building.

Khadija Saye and Mary Mendy

The art photographer was celebrating taking part in the Venice Biennale. Credit: Twitter/Khajida Saye

Artist Khadija Saye, Ya-Haddy Sisi Saye, died in the hallway on the ninth floor as a result of inhalation of fire fumes and burns. Tottenham MP David Lammy, a friend of the family, paid tribute to the 24-year-old in a post describing her as a "wonderful young woman". Khadija Saye's mother, 52-year-old Mary Mendy, was also among the victims of the fire.

Mary Mendy died along with her daughter Khadija.

Ms Mendy's sister Betty Jackson said in a statement on behalf of the family: "Your heart was pure, your soul was one of a kind. You will be missed for a life time. You will remain forever in our hearts. You and your beautiful daughter Khadija Saye.

Gloria Trevisan and Marco Gottardi

Gloria Trevisan and Marco Gottardi Credit: Met Police

Italian architect Gloria Trevisan, 26, and her partner Marco Gottardi, 27, had only recently moved into the 23rd floor. Gloria called her parents to say goodbye after the smoke and flames cut off any hope of getting out. The couple were later confirmed dead by authorities.

Anthony Disson

Mr Disson died before he could meet his latest grandchild.

Anthony Disson, 65, is reported to have lived on the 10th floor of the building. An inquest heard that he died from inhalation of fire fumes. He was laid to rest a mile from the tower in Ladbroke Grove, at a ceremony in June attended by Sadiq Khan.

Khadija Khalloufi

Khadija died after becoming separated from her husband.

Moroccan Khadija Khalloufi, 52, lived on the 17th floor of the building with her retired lecturer husband Sabah Abdullah, 72. The couple fled the building together but became separated. Tragically, she is thought to have died just 50 feet away from where he was waiting for her outside.

The Begum family

Four members of the Begum family perished in the fire.

Rabeya Begum, 64, Mohammed Hamid, 27, Mohammed Hanif, 26 and Husna Begum, 22, were found on the 17th floor of the building and died from injuries "consistent with the effects of fire".

Ali Yawar Jafari

At 81, Ali Yawar Jafari is thought to be one of the oldest Grenfell victims.

One of the oldest victims was 81-year-old Ali Yawar Jafari. He lost contact with his wife and daughter while trying to escape. Firefighters managed to pull him from the blaze but he died from breathing in smoke and heart problems.

Mohamednur Tuccu and family

Mohamednur Tuccu's wife and daughter also died.

Mohamednur Tuccu, 44, did not live in the tower but was visiting relatives with his wife and three-year-old daughter. His wife Amalahmedin and their three-year-old daughter Amaya also died.

Mohamed Neda

Mohamed Amied Neda

Mohamed Amied Neda, 57, was found outside the tower block and died as a result of multiple injuries consistent with a fall.

Hamid Kani

Hamid Kani lived alone on the 15th floor. Credit: Met Police

The body of 60-year-old Hamid Kani from Iran was found on the 23rd floor. His family had said he lived on the 15th floor but had no relatives in the the UK. Mr Kani's niece, Maryam Shahvarani, said he lived alone, struggled with hearing problems and wore hearing aids. An inquest was told Mr Kani died of injuries "consistent with the effects of fire".

Fathia Ahmed and children

The 71-year-old - thought also to be referred to as Fathiya Alsanousi - and son Abufars Ibrahim, 39, and daughter Isra Ibrahim, 35, were confirmed dead by authorities.

Berkti and Biruk Haftom

Berkti Haftom and her son Biruk.

Berkti Haftom, 29, and her son Biruk, 12, died in the fire at Grenfell Tower after she was formally identified.

Sheila Smith

Sheila, 84, formerly known as Sheila Smith, lived on the 16th floor, where she died from injuries consistent with the effects of fire,an inquest heard. A friend, Gary Allen, said he had known her for 20 years, and described her as a "truly beautiful person" and "love, pure and simple".

Vincent Chiejina

The body of the 60-year-old was recovered from the 17th floor and identified by his DNA. His provisional cause of death was given as "consistent with the effects of fire".

Abdeslam Sebbar

Abdeslam Sebbar's remains were found in a flat on the 11th floor. The 67-year-old died from smoke fumes.

Steve Power

Steve Power, 63, died on the 15th floor of the tower, where he is thought to have lived.

Amna Mahmud Idris

The 27-year-old's remains were discovered on the second highest floor of the high-rise, the inquest into her death heard.

Gary Maunders

The 57-year-old is believed to have been with his friend Deborah Lamprell, who also died, when the fire broke out. Mr Maunders died from injuries "consistent with the effects of fire", an inquest heard.

Rania Ibrahim and children

Rania Ibrahim and her daughters.

The 30-year-old lived in the flat with her two young daughters, Hania, 3, and Fethia, 5. Her husband also lived in the property but was away on the night of the fire. Ms Ibrahim recorded a harrowing Facebook Live video as smoke filled their flat at the top of the tower block. She was identified by her dental records, an inquest attended by her husband and surviving family heard.

Raymond "Moses" Bernard

Raymond

The body of Mr Bernard, 63, was discovered in his flat with that of one of the youngest victims, 12-year-old Biruk Haftom. The family of Mr Bernard, known to his friends as Moses, said: "Gone but not forgotten, you are so dearly loved by us all and will be sadly missed by many. May you rest in eternal peace, with love always."

Hesham Rahman

Hesham Rahman.

The 57-year-old lived alone on the 23rd floor. He is said to have last made contact with his family at around 3am on the night of the fire when he told them he could smell smoke.

The Choucair family

Nadia Choucair and her three children.

Nadia Choucair and her husband Bassem lived on the 22nd floor with their three daughters Mierna, 13, Fatima, 11, and Zeinab, 3. Grandmother Sirria Choucair, 60, was also killed in the fire.

Logan Gomes

Logan Gomes, who was stillborn in hospital after his parents escaped the tower, has also been recorded as a victim. His family managed to escape from the blaze but mother Andreia Gomes lost the child, giving birth to him as she lay unconscious in hospital hours after they escaped. Speaking to the Sunday Telegraph, her husband Marco said doctors had opted to deliver the infant after his heart stopped beating to ensure Andreia would not contract an infection, adding it was a "very traumatic time".

The El-Wahabi family

Nur Huda with mother Faouzia El-Wahabi.

Five members of the family were killed in the fire. Abdulaziz El-Wahabi, 52, his wife Faouzia, 41, their elder son Yasin, 20, daughter Nur Huda, 16, and younger son Mehdi, eight.

Abdulaziz El-Wahabi (right) with his sons Mehdi (left) and Yasin.

Ligaya Moore

Ligaya Moore.

The 79-year-old was a Filipino living in the tower and her family said she had lived in London for over 40 years. Mrs Moore's grandson, Nico Purificacion, called her "an admirable woman". "Our family loves her so much," he said. "She's very fun to be with despite her age. So innocent yet very straightforward. She's been in London for a very long time, she visits us here in the Philippines once in a while."

Jessica Urbano Ramirez

Jessica Urbano Ramirez.

Jessica, 12, died on the 23rd floor. Her aunt Ana Ospina said shortly after the fire: "She last spoke to her mum when she borrowed a phone and told her she was on the stairs with other people."

Mariem and Eslah Elgwahry

Mariem Elgwahry.

Mariem Elgwahry, 27, lived on the 19th floor of the tower with her mother Eslah, 64. The bodies of the two women were found side by side on the 23rd floor where they had tried to escape the blaze.

Sakina and Fatima Afrasahabi

Sisters Sakina, 65, and Fatima, 59, moved to the UK in 1997 and were found dead on the 23rd floor. The Iranian family of the pair told The Guardian that Sakina was disabled and only able to move with a walking stick. They said: "She was forced to live there because she had no other option. On a good day she couldn't come down 18 floors - but in the fire and smoke?"

Joseph Daniels

The 69-year-old reportedly suffered from dementia and could not be persuaded by his son to leave the building. He died from injuries consistent with the effects of fire, an inquest heard.

Deborah Lamprell

Deborah Lamprell.