Proceeds from the Community Shield match at Wembley will be donated to those affected by the Grenfell Tower fire.

The Football Association hopes to raise around £1.25m for the victims and their families. The number of people to have died, including those classed as missing presumed dead, remains at 79.

Police considering manslaughter charges over Grenfell Tower fire – Politics live Read more

The FA will also invite survivors, emergency service personnel and the families of the victims to the game between Arsenal and Chelsea on Sunday 6 August.

The FA chairman, Greg Clarke, said: “Like the rest of the country, we were all deeply saddened by the terrible incident at Grenfell Tower. The suffering and loss for those involved is unimaginable.

“Whilst only a football match, we hope that in some small way through the Community Shield we can help. Two great London clubs will come together to play at the city’s most famous stadium just a few miles from Kensington. They will be united in their passion for football, grief at this tragic loss and support for their community.

“Football is for all, and we hope that on 6 August it can in its own way give something back to those who are most in need.”

The FA Cup winners Arsenal and Premier League champions Chelsea have donated their club match fee to the Grenfell Tower support fund.

Any fans attending will have the opportunity to donate an additional £5 to the fund, should they wish, when purchasing a ticket via the clubs.

Chelsea’s chairman, Bruce Buck, said: “We believe it is appropriate and timely that the first major football match involving top-flight clubs to take place in our city since the tragedy will be dedicated in such a way to the victims and survivors, and to the enormous number of heroes of the rescue operation, especially given this occasion’s long history of being played for the benefit of the wider community and people in need of support.”

Arsenal’s chief executive, Ivan Gazidis, said: “The club stands side by side with Chelsea in reaching out to the community and expressing our support and solidarity for those who have lost friends and family, their homes and their sense of security in the wake of this tragic event.

“We also pay tribute to our city’s emergency services who showed immense courage and bravery. We play the FA Community Shield on Sunday, August 6, with the victims and the heroes of this terrible tragedy close to our hearts.”

The English Football League said its clubs would give up their share of Community Shield proceeds, with the EFL topping up that sum to make a £175,000 total donation.