Share this article with Google Plus

A firefighter takes cover behind a riot police officer’s shield (Picture: Ben Cawthra/LNP)

Riot police used their shields to protect firemen from falling debris as they entered the Grenfell tower block in west London.

More than 200 firefighters were sent to tackle the fire at the 27-storey building, reported just after 1.15am this morning.

Man moves into his dream home and finds 'more than 150 problems' on day one

Pictures show firefighters and riot officers entering the building in North Kensington with shields raised above their heads.

People who escaped the fire spoke of others trapped and screaming for help.

Commander Stuart Cundy, from the Metropolitan Police, confirmed this morning that at least six people are dead.

74 people have been taken to five hospitals across London and it is not known how many were inside the building.

More than 200 were sent to tackle the blaze in west London this morning (Picture: Ben Cawthra/LNP)

The fire was reported just after 1.15am this morning (Picture: REX/Shutterstock)

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

Nikki Crow posted a picture on Twitter of firefighters gathered outside the building with the caption: ‘Heroes.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

Pictures from the scene show flames engulfing the block and a plume of smoke visible across the capital.

Kensington and Chelsea council leader Nick Paget-Brown described it as a ‘very, very severe fire.’

Firemen arrive at the block as riot police carry shields to guard them (Picture: EPA/ANDY RAIN)

A fireman and a riot officer walk through the smoke (Picture: Ben Cawthra/LNP)

Police confirmed a number of fatalities and that 30 people are being treated in hospital (Picture: Leon Neal/Getty Images)

Sorry, this video is no longer available.

He told Sky News: ‘Clearly it’s an absolutely devastating fire. Several hundred would have been in there. It’s a question of establishing how many people were in there at the time of the fire.

‘I’m really not in any position to answer any questions about the structure.

‘Clearly there’s a lot more work to do to evacuate the building and to establish how safe it is.’

One resident claimed the ‘real issue’ in the blaze was when it ‘caught fire to the cladding outside’, part of a new £8.7 million refurbishment in May last year.