A FAMILY who miraculously survived the Grenfell Tower blaze have revealed their heartbreak at losing their unborn son to poisonous fumes, hours after escaping the fire.

Marcio Gomes and Andreia Perestrelo survived the deadly fire after climbing down from the 21st floor with their two daughters, Megan, 10 and Luana, 12.

Mr Gomes was praised as a hero after he battled down smoke-filled stairs with his family including his wife, who was seven months pregnant at the time. At the bottom he realised Luana had collapsed halfway down due to the thick smoke and he ran back inside to save her life. Following the miraculous escape Ms Perestrelo was placed in a medically-induced coma in hospital.

Mr Gomes has since revealed he was told later that night the “baby’s heart had stopped and the priority is the mother”.

He was later forced to break the news to his devastated wife that they had lost their son.

“My wife gave birth that night while she was in an induced coma, so she didn’t know at the time. At 11.03 in the evening my baby boy was born,” the 38-year-old school inspector told The Telegraph.

“I was holding him, he looked peaceful, like a baby that was just sleeping. I wanted to be there with him, but he had already died.”

As his wife regained consciousness, Mr Gomes said he was forced to explain what happened.

“At first she didn’t want to talk about it and she said she didn’t want to see the baby. But I know my wife, the hospital were really good at keeping the baby there for us. The next day she was she was very happy to see the baby, she didn’t want the baby to go away,” he said.

The news also devastated Luana and Megan, who had been excited about the arrival of their new sibling, who would be called Logan Isaac.

“The girls already had plans made, they were already planning things like ‘Logan can sleep with me in my bed’, and what they were going to do, so this has hit them quite hard as well,” he said.

“It could have been so much worse, we understand that,” he said. “But at the same time we lost a member of the family who didn’t even get to experience fresh air, so it is a very traumatic time.”

On the night of the deadly fire Mr Gomes called emergency services and was told to stay inside the property. However by 4:30am he realised the building had been engulfed by fire and they would not be able to get out.

“I just wrapped them all up in wet towels and sheets and said, ‘There’s no turning back — we have to go’” he said at the time.

“As soon as we opened the door all the smoke came in.

“But at that time we had no choice because the fire started coming in through the windows.

“We had to go down the stairs from the 21st floor.

“You couldn’t see anything. We had to step over bodies with my young daughters and my seven months pregnant wife.

“Our neighbours were with us. I was pushing them down as well.”

The Grenfell Tower disaster is known to have killed at least 80 people and likely hundreds more as authorities work to determine who was inside the building on the night of the blaze.

Testing of the cladding used to cosmetically upgrade the building has shown it was highly flammable and residents from other buildings using the same material have been evacuated.