Thousands of people could be at risk (Picture: Google)

Fears are growing over how many tower blocks in London have been fitted with the same cladding thought to have played a role in the Grenfell Tower disaster.

Witnesses claim the fire spread so quickly because of panels fitted during a renovation to insulate the tower and improve its appearance.

They said they caught fire and spread the flames up the outside of the building.

Fire safety experts have spoken out about their fears the cavity created by the cladding could create a ‘chimney’.

Dozens of tower blocks appear to have been fitted with cladding similar to that used at Grenfell, Kensington.

Ferrier Point, Newham

The 23 story tower block had a similar refurbishment (Picture: Google Maps)

The same company which refurbished Grenfell Tower previously renovated 23 story Ferrier Point in Canning Town, Newham.

After securing the Grenfell contract, Rydon said in a press release they had ‘delivered a number of refurbishments to residential tower blocks’, citing Ferrier as a ‘similar’ example.

Advertisement

Advertisement

As part of the £8.5 million Ferrier regeneration (Grenfell cost £8.6 million), the whole block was clad in insulated rainscreen cladding.

How the fire could have spread through cladding (Picture: MailOnline)

MORE: First pictures of Grenfell Tower flat show complete devastation inside

A Newham Council spokesperson said they are ‘carrying out further assessments at Ferrier Point and other tall blocks to see if any action needs to be taken.’

Construction company Rydon said they could not comment on whether the cladding was a factor at Grenfell ‘in light of the Public Inquiry’.

But fire expert Sam Webb told MailOnline that any similar cladding should be ‘torn down’.

The Chalcots, Camden

The Chalcots (Picture: Google Maps) The Chalcots (Picture: Google Maps) The Chalcots (Picture: Google Maps) The Chalcots (Picture: Google Maps)

Rydon hired the company now known as Harley Facades to fit five tower blocks in Camden with thermal rain screen cladding between 2006 and 2009. We have asked them whether the same material was used.

In the wake of the Grenfell disaster, Camden Council has also ordered additional safety checks on its tower blocks.

They wrote a letter to residents saying: ‘We have confidence that our fire safety procedures are appropriate,’ they said, but added they were ready to respond to any new advice.

Clements Court, Hounslow

Harley Facades used Clements Court as a case study (Picture: Harley Facades)

MORE: Mum flooded bathroom in Grenfell Tower to buy time until family was rescued

Harley Facades used Clements Court tower block as an example of how they changed the outside using Aluminum Composite Panel rainscreen.

The ACM panels are not manufactured by Harley Facades, which has said it was not aware of any link between the Grenfell Tower fire and the exterior cladding fitted to it.

The company said they will ‘fully support and co-operate with the investigations into this fire.’

Hounslow Council leader Steve Curran said he had met with cabinet members ‘to agree a set of joint actions that continue to provide reassurance to our tenants who live in high-rise properties.’

Advertisement

Advertisement

Castlemaine Tower

(Picture: Google Street View)

MORE: Sadiq Khan faces despair and frustration over Grenfell Tower fire

Castlemaine Tower in Battersea was given a ‘complete external envelope’ by Harley Facades in 2014.

That included aluminium rainscreen cladding and Schuco curtain walling.

A Wandsworth Council spokesman said: ‘I understand that people living in tower blocks will be deeply troubled by this fire and I have asked our housing and regeneration department to write to those residents to provide them with as much information and reassurance as possible at this early stage in the fire investigation.

‘Clearly it will take time for the fire brigade to find out how this fire was able to spread so quickly and we will respond to any further safety recommendations that follow.’

Wandsworth Council statement following Grenfell Tower fire https://t.co/Nl6rLgDQVH — Wandsworth Council (@wandbc) June 15, 2017

Grenfell Tower was destroyed in the blaze (Picture: Rick Findler/PA Wire)

These are just four of the towers which may need to be looked at again, but there are many more across the UK.

Speaking today, London Mayor Sadiq Khan said checks on other tower blocks ‘need to be conducted as soon as possible.’

He called for an interim ruling on what led to the disaster from the inquiry by the end of the summer.

‘There are obvious questions’ about the Grenfell refurbishment and whether it led to the fire spreading, he said.

‘We need those answers as soon as possible.’