Flames broke out on the ninth floor (Picture: Paul Irwin)

Four people have been injured after flames ripped through the top of a towerblock on Wednesday night.

Hundreds of people were evacuated from their homes after the fire, which is believed to have started with a toaster at the block of flats near Belfast in Northern Ireland.

The four people treated by the ambulance service had minor injuries, but the fire has rattled nerves coming so soon after towerblock safety was under scrutiny following Grenfell.

Julie Ann Jackson, from the Seymour Hill and Conway Community Residents helping those who live in the flat, told the Belfast Telegraph that the fire started in a man’s flat who was able to get out and warn others.

‘I think they were shook up from Grenfell, and after tonight they are really shook up,’ she said.

Fire at the flats facing Seymour Hill Dunmurry, hope everyone is safe pic.twitter.com/PBpODnHYep — Jolene Welsh (@jolwel) November 15, 2017

The towerblock in Belfast tonight (Picture: Paul Irwin)

Smoke and flames coming from the Coolmoyne House tower block in Dunmurry (Picture: RobertCullenFC/Twitter)

Emergency services outside the block (Picture: Alan Lewis/PhotopressBelfast/Justin Kernoghan)

It comes just five months after around 80 people died in the deadly Grenfell Tower blaze in Kensington.

Advertisement

Advertisement

This fire was thankfully contained after it broke out on the ninth floor of Coolmoyne House in Dunmurry around 6pm, Northern Ireland Ambulance Service spokesman John McPoland said.

Robert Zwaagman, who lives on the 12th floor, said the first he knew of the fire was when fire crews arrived.

He insisted an alarm should have sounded throughout the building.

Firefighters at the scene at Coolmoyne House in Dunmurry (Picture: Liam McBurney/PA)

‘Especially after the Grenfell Tower accident the main question and the main concern of mine is the fact why didn’t the alarms go off, with such a big fire, on every floor?’ he said.

Mr Zwaagman said it had been a ‘frightening’ experience.

‘I am okay now but just a couple of minutes ago I was shaking,’ he said.

The side of the building was damaged (Picture: Liam McBurney/PA)

The Northern Ireland Fire and Rescue Service brought the fire under control this evening.

Assembly member Edwin Poots said his overriding emotion was one of relief.

‘It’s one of huge relief that this isn’t another Grenfell disaster,’ he said.

‘This is a high tower and it could have been much, much worse but we had a brilliant response from the fire service who quickly brought the fire under control and got everyone out of the building, supported by the other emergency services.’

The Democratic Unionist representative said residents had endured a ‘hugely traumatic’ experience.

‘The big concern for a lot of the residents is that smoke alarms did not go off throughout the building, so many residents were in a burning building and didn’t realise it,’ he said.