QPR and Fulham have both offered help for people affected by a fire which has destroyed a tower block in West London QPR and Fulham have both offered help for people affected by a fire which has destroyed a tower block in West London

QPR owner Tony Fernandes has offered up Loftus Road as a potential relief centre option for the hundreds of residents affected by the Grenfell Tower fire.

According to Sky News, several people have been killed - and others remain trapped - in a large fire on the west London estate, with the blaze being battled by more than 200 firefighters and 40 fire engines.

💙 We're devastated to see the terrible #GrenfellTower fire in west London.#QPR's thoughts are with everyone affected. — QPR FC (@QPRFC) June 14, 2017

Footage on social media showed the building engulfed in fire, with huge flames stretching over a number of floors.

Tony Fernandes says QPR are ready to help victims of the Grenfell Tower fire in any way they can

The fire brigade said the fire had spread throughout the entire building, now covered in plumes of smoke with visible pockets of fire within the charred structure.

I have asked @QPRFC lee hoos to see if loftus road could be used a relief centre . Our community team will be mobilised. We will do whatever — Tony Fernandes (@tonyfernandes) June 14, 2017

Fernandes, majority shareholder and chairman of QPR since 2011, tweeted that he had spoken to Hoops chief executive officer Lee Hoos as to whether the club could help in any way.

Tragic what I'm seeing in North Kensington. @QPRFC will do whatever it can to help. My thoughts to all. Really sad — Tony Fernandes (@tonyfernandes) June 14, 2017

"I have asked QPR's Lee Hoos to see if Loftus Road could be used a relief centre. Our community team will be mobilised. We will do whatever," Fernandes tweeted out on Wednesday morning.

Our thoughts are with everyone affected by last night's terrible Grenfell Tower fire in west London. — Crystal Palace F.C. (@CPFC) June 14, 2017

The thoughts of all of us at #FFC are with those affected by the #GrenfellTower fire in West London. — Fulham Football Club (@FulhamFC) June 14, 2017

QPR, Crystal Palace, Fulham also tweeted out condolences and well wishes from their official Twitter accounts.

Fulham added that Craven Cottage and Motspur Park are open to accept item donations to help those affected by the fire.