POSTED: July 30th 2010

NewsUpdate

PyeongChang 2018: Alpensia resort and water park complete and full for summer season

LAURA WALDEN / Sports Features Communications



TAMPA/PYEONGCHANG, July 30: The Alpensia Resort area at PyeongChang is now fully opened and operating at full force after the Ocean 700 water park welcomed visitors already last week. The quaint alpine mountain area in the Taebeck mountain range has dual functionality as both a winter and summer sports and recreation destination.



The Alpensia Resort cluster area will be the heart of the PyeongChang 2018 bid. The zone will gather the venues for the IOC hotel, Olympic Village, Olympic stadium, venues for the snow and sliding events, the main media and broadcast centers, and the media village.



The statuesque ski jumping stadium rising high in the valley is also planned in the bid as the venue for the opening and closing ceremonies.



Ocean 700 relates to the fact that the resort is 700 meters above sea level and offers an optimum environment for quick recovery of fatigue and relaxation which makes it optimal for hosting sports events.



Bid chair Yang-Ho Cho said, “We are delighted that the Alpensia Resort is now fully open so that people from Korea, Asia and around the world can enjoy these world class sporting, recreational and cultural facilities.



“The investment we have made to build this resort shows PyeongChang’s commitment to staging the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games in 2018, and that we are delivering on our promises to the IOC and the Olympic Family.”



The resort is unrivaled the largest complex in Korea and is a US$1.4 billion investment built on 4.9 km2 of land. Facilities include hotels, private residential property, winter sports venues, a golf club, a water park, and convention and concert centers.



Nestled in the valley the beautiful rambling InterContinental Alpensia Hotel is a five star hotel and is the projected IOC official accommodation. There are also two Holiday Inns located nearby, one also a five star resort and the other an inn and suites condominium.



The resort is fully booked for the upcoming Great Mountains International Music Festival which is being held at the Alpensia Concert Hall through August 10, 2010.



PyeongChang is in the 2018 bid race with Annecy, France and Munich, Germany to host the winter Games. The final decision will be voted at the IOC session July 6, 2011 in Durban, South Africa.





Keywords · PyeongChang 2018 · Olympic bids · Yang-Ho Cho · Gangwon Province

For more information contact:

Laura Walden ( )

All original materials contained in this section are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of Sports Features Communications, Inc the owner of that content. It is prohibited to alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.