The medals that will be awarded during next year's Winter Olympic Games in Pyeongchang have officially been unveiled during special events in Seoul and New York City.

Created by Lee Suk-woo, an industrial designer from South Korea, the medals "reflect the traditions and culture" of the host nation, it is claimed.

They have incorporated the Korean alphabet known as Hangeul, a system of letters unique to Korea which was also used in the design of the official Games emblems and pictograms.

The two-dimensional consonants have been turned into three-dimensional figures and cut into cylindrical forms to complete the design that shows the sporting discipline and event.

The front of the medal bears diagonal lines symbolising "both the history of the Olympics and the determination of the participants".

On the back of the medal the sports discipline and event alongside the Games’ emblem can be found while the ribbon from which the medal hangs has been created using the traditional Gapsa textile of South Korea.

The medals are said to "reflect the traditions and culture" of South Korea ©Pyeongchang 2018

The medals were officially revealed in Seoul by Sports Minister Do Jong-hwan, vice-governor of Gangwon Province Song Suk-doo and Pyeongchang 2018 President Lee Hee-beom.

"The launch of the Olympic Winter Games medals today is a proud moment for us all with less than five months to go until the first gold medal will be awarded," Lee said.

"The medals are a wonderful compilation of our culture, tradition and the Olympic values.

"We wanted the medal to be a symbol of Korea and all the wonderful memories that the athletes will take home from their time here.

"From the case, to the ribbon, to the medals themselves - it has been designed with care and creativity, and we are very excited to see the athlete's passion and pride when they are presented on the podiums at Pyeongchang."

South Korean President Moon Jae-in smiles after he put a gold Pyeongchang 2018 Olympic Games medal around the neck of former speed skater Kim Gui-jin as they were unveiled simultaneously in Seoul and New York City ©Korean Government

Running simultaneously with the Seoul event, a special event also took place in New York City at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Titled "Pyeongchang 2018 at the Met: Celebrating the Olympic Winter Games for Peace", South Korean President Moon Jae-in was in attendance.

He is visiting the city for the 72nd Session of the United Nations General Assembly.

Guests enjoyed performances by Korean artists during dinner, after which Moon addressed the audience and the medals were unveiled on stage.

Games ambassador and renowned Korean opera singer Sumi Jo sang three songs during proceedings.