Press releases

International Olympic Committee (IOC) President Jacques Rogge has appointed Ms Gunilla Lindberg to chair the Coordination Commission for the XXIII Olympic Winter Games in PyeongChang, Republic of Korea, in 2018. PyeongChang was awarded the 2018 Olympic Winter Games last month in Durban. Lindberg will lead a strong, multinational team of men and women, who will be responsible for assisting and guiding the PyeongChang Organising Committee during the period leading up to the Olympic Winter Games, as well as monitoring the progress of preparations.

Lindberg, who led the 2018 Evaluation Commission, will be rejoining the IOC Executive Board as of the end of the month, building on her two previous mandates as a member (2000-2004) and Vice-President (2004-2008). An IOC member since 1996 and Secretary General of the Association of National Olympic Committees (ANOC) since 2004, Lindberg brings vast experience from her time spent on Coordination Commissions for five Olympic Games.

The members of the 2018 Coordination Commission, also announced today, include IOC members with wide-ranging Olympic Games experience gained either from work on former IOC Evaluation or Coordination Commissions or with previous Games Organising Committees.

The members of the Commission represent the many stakeholders of the Olympic Movement, including the athletes, the National Olympic Committees, and International Sports Federations, and act as a link between them, the Organising Committee and other Olympic family stakeholders, thereby ensuring the coordination necessary to help deliver successful Olympic Games.

“Ms Lindberg has all the qualities and charisma to lead the team who will be responsible for assisting PyeongChang in the next seven years”, said IOC President Rogge. “She knows exactly what it takes to stage successful Olympic Winter Games and through the work that she carried out while leading the 2018 Evaluation Commission. She is already well acquainted with PyeongChang’s Olympic project and immediate priorities. She will be a strong ally to the Organising Committee and will ensure that we see great Games in 2018”, added Rogge.

Commenting on her appointment, Lindberg said: “I am delighted and honoured to have been chosen to head the 2018 Coordination Commission. Having chaired the 2018 Evaluation Commission, I have first-hand knowledge of the many strengths that PyeongChang and South Korea have to offer to the Olympic Movement. I am confident that, with the assistance of my very experienced colleagues, we will help PyeongChang deliver outstanding Winter Games in 2018”.

The composition of the Coordination Commission is as follows:





Gunilla LINDBERG Chair, IOC Member SWE

Gilbert FELLI Olympic Games Executive Director SUI

Angela RUGGIERO IOC Member and Athletes’ Commission Representative USA

Gian-Franco KASPER AIOWF Representative SUI

Tsunekazu TAKEDA ANOC Representative JPN

Ottavio CINQUANTA IOC Member ITA

HRH Crown Prince Frederik of DENMARK IOC Member DEN

René FASEL IOC Member SUI

Barry MAISTER IOC Member NZL

Adam L. PENGILLY IOC Member GBR

Zaiqing YU IOC Member CHN



###

For more information, please contact the IOC Media Relations Team:

Tel: +41 21 621 6000 e-mail: pressoffice@olympic.org, or visit our web site at www.olympic.org

Videos

YouTube: www.youtube.com/iocmedia

Photos

For an extensive selection of photos available shortly after each event, please follow us on Flickr

To request archive photos and footage, please contact our Images team at: images@olympic.org

Social media

For up-to-the-minute information on the IOC and regular updates, please follow us on Twitter and Facebook.

Innsbruck 2012

1st edition of the Winter Youth Olympic Games, Innsbruck, Austria,13 to 22 January 2012 Follow us on Twitter and Facebook