2018 Winter Olympics Full Schedule.

South Korean city and surrounding area Pyeongchang hosts the 2018 Winter Olympics, with the action spread across 13 different venues and stadiums.

Pyeongchang is in the north of the country, just over 100 miles form the capital Seoul. South Korea beat Munich in Germany and Annecy in France to host the Games.

Day 1 – Saturday 10th February

Main event: Men’s Snowboarding Slopestyle

Team GB’s Billy Morgan rides in one of the most dramatic events of the Games, with boarders performing tricks and flips over a course packed with rails and jumps. The qualifiers are today, with the final taking place tomorrow.

Medal events

Biathlon: Women’s 7.5km Sprint

Cross Country Skiing: Women’s 7.5km Skiathlon

Ski Jumping: Men’s Individual Normal Hill

Short Track Speed Skating: Men’s 1500m

Speed Skating: Women’s 3000m

Day 2 – Sunday 11th February

Main event: Men’s downhill skiing

For many the blue riband event of the Games – watch out for an almighty clash between Swiss star Beat Feuz and Norway’s Axel Lund Svindal.

Medal events

Speed Skating: Men’s 5000m

Alpine Skiing: Men’s Downhill

Cross Country Skiing: Men’s 15km Skiathlon

Biathlon: Men’s 10km Sprint

Snowboarding: Men’s Slopestyle

Freestyle Skiing: Women’s Moguls

Luge: Men’s Singles

Day 3 – Monday 12th February

Main event: Women’s giant slalom skiing

Mikaela Shiffrin is one of the true stars of the Winter Olympics, and this will be the first chance to watch her in action.

Also on TV today is the women’s snowboarding slopestyle: Team GB’s Katie Ormerod was hoping to follow up Jenny Jones’s Sochi success four years ago, but a broken ankle just the day before the Games cruelly means she’s out of competition.

Medal events

Figure Skating: Team Event

Speed Skating: Women’s 1500m

Alpine Skiing: Women’s Giant Slalom

Ski Jumping: Women’s Individual Normal Hill

Biathlon: Women’s 10km Pursuit and Men’s 12.5km Pursuit

Snowboarding: Women’s Slopestyle

Freestyle Skiing: Men’s Moguls

Day 4 – Tuesday 13th February

Main event: Women’s short track speed skating

Britain’s Elise Christie is out for redemption after being disqualified three times in Sochi 2014. For all that, she’s still arguably Britain’s best medal hope, and will be competing in the frenetic short track speed skating, which sees skaters race side by side round a tight track.

Medal events

Short Track Speed Skating: Women’s 500m

Speed Skating: Men’s 1500m

Curling: Mixed Doubles

Alpine Skiing: Men’s Combined

Cross Country Skiing: Men’s and Women’s Sprint Classic

Snowboarding: Women’s Halfpipe

Luge: Women’s Singles

Day 5 – Wednesday 14th February

Main event: men’s and women’s curling

Both Team GB’s curling teams have a great chance at getting on the podium in Pyeongchang, and the men’s and women’s squads have their opening matches today. Will you be addicted to curling come the end of the Games?

Medal events

Speed Skating: Women’s 1000m

Alpine Skiing: Women’s Slalom

Nordic Combined: Men’s Individual 10km

Biathlon: Women’s 15km Individual

Snowboarding: Men’s Halfpipe

Luge: Men’s Doubles

Day 6 – Thursday 15th February

Main event: men’s snowboard cross

A mad dash for the line featuring multiple riders racing a track full of jumps and bends. Crashes are commonplace, clean runs less so…

Medal events

Figure Skating: Pairs

Speed Skating: Men’s 10,000m

Alpine Skiing: Men’s Super G

Cross Country Skiing: Women’s 10km Free

Biathlon: Men’s 20km Individual

Snowboarding: Men’s Snowboard Cross

Luge: Team Relay

Day 7 – Friday 17th February

Main event: Men’s figure skating

Spin for the win with figure skating star Nathan Chen, a simply incredible athlete in a field full of champions.

Medal events

Speed Skating: Women’s 5000m

Cross Country Skiing: Men’s 15km Free

Freestyle Skiing: Women’s Aerials

Snowboarding: Women’s Snowboard Cross

Skeleton: Men’s

Day 8 – Saturday 17th February

Main event: women’s skeleton

Medal events

Figure Skating: Men’s Free Programme

Short Track Speed Skating: Women’s 1500m Final and Men’s 1000m Final

Alpine Skiing: Women’s Super G

Ski Jumping: Men’s Individual Large Hill

Cross Country Skiing: Women’s 4x5km Relay

Biathlon: Women’s 12.5km Mass Start

Freestyle Skiing: Women’s Slopestyle

Skeleton: Women’s

Day 9 – Sunday 18th February

Main event: men’s skiing slopestyle

Medal events

Speed Skating: Women’s 500m

Alpine Skiing: Men’s Giant Slalom

Cross Country Skiing: Men’s 4x10km Relay

Biathlon: Men’s 15km Mass Start

Freestyle Skiing: Men’s Slopestyle and Men’s Aerials

Day 10 – Monday 19th February

Main event: Women’s Big Air snowboarding

Medal events

Speed Skating: Men’s 500m

Ski Jumping: Men’s Team Large Hill

Bobsleigh: Two Man

Day 11 – Tuesday 20th February

Main event: figure skating ice dance

The beauty and grace of the world’s best figure skaters come together to prove their worth on the biggest stage of all. British couple Penny Coomes and Nick Buckland have an ace up their sequinned sleeves, having worked with Olympic legends Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean.

Medal events

Figure Skating: Ice Dance

Short Track Speed Skating: Women’s 3000m Relay

Nordic Combined: Men’s Individual 10km

Biathlon: Mixed Relay

Freestyle Skiing: Women’s Halfpipe

Day 12 – Wednesday 21st February

Main event: Women’s downhill skiing

Medal events

Speed Skating: Men’s and Women’s Team Pursuit

Alpine Skiing: Women’s Downhill

Cross Country Skiing: Men’s and Women’s Team Sprint Free

Freestyle Skiing: Men’s Ski Cross

Bobsleigh: Women

Day 13 – Thursday 22nd February

Main event: short track speed skating

This is Elise Christie’s third and final chance at taking home a medal. She’s racing in the women’s 1,000m.

Medal events

Ice Hockey: Women’s

Short Track Speed Skating: Men’s 500m, Women’s 1000m, Men’s 5000m Relay

Alpine Skiing: Men’s Slalom

Nordic Combined: Men’s Team

Biathlon: Women’s 4x6km Relay

Freestyle Skiing: Women’s Ski Cross

Day 14 – Friday 23rd February

Main event: Women’s curling semi-finals

Can team GB deliver on their pre-Olympic promise and make it all the way to the final? If all’s going well, they will be within sight of a medal here…

Medal events

Figure Skating: Women’s Free Programme

Speed Skating: Men’s 1000m

Alpine Skiing: Women’s Combined

Snowboarding: Women’s Big Air

Biathlon: Men’s 4×7.5km Relay

Freestyle Skiing: Women’s Ski Cross

Day 15 – Saturday 24th February

Main event: men’s snowboarding Big Air final

Medal events

Alpine Skiing: Team Event

Cross Country Skiing: Men’s 50km Mass Start Classic

Curling: Men

Snowboarding: Men’s Big Air, Women’s and Men’s Parallel Giant Slalom

Speed Skating: Women’s and Men’s Mass Start

Day 16 –Sunday 25th February

Main event: four-man bobsleigh

Buckle up for one last furious ride down the Olympic course, on the final day of Olympic competition.

Medal events

Bobsleigh: four-man

Cross Country Skiing: Women’s 30km Mass Start Classic

Curling: Women

Ice Hockey: Men