Some of the most beautiful and glamorous women in the world or in the universe like the Miss Universe 2015 candidates are baring it all. They are removing all their make up for the whole world to see their natural beauty without any enhancements as the ladies promote the Hashtag "#ConfidentlyBeautiful" in commemoration of this year's pageant.



A revolutionary look on the women, who are usually in their glamorous state, in full make up have taken it all away to promote the contest and the Hashtag "#ConfidentlyBeautiful" for the whole world.

Reigning Miss Universe Paulina Vega kicked off the promotion posting on her Twitter, writing: "Every #MissUniverse is #ConfidentlyBeautiful. Are you? Show us your no-makeup selfies with #ConfidentlyBeautiful," she wrote alongside a photo of herself with no make-up while lying down.

Meanwhile, Miss Bahamas 2015 Toria Nichole Penn also supported the promotion, as she posted her own version of the hashtag -- still without any make-up or even any hair product on showing her natural curly hair. "Preliminaries today! Woke up fresh faced and ready to do this! @MissUniverse #MissUniverse #Confidentlybeautiful," she wrote on Twitter.

The trend, which was later on followed and supported by several other celebrities and models in Hollywood, came after last year's Miss Universe promotion, which was known to be "#NoMakeupSelfie," which became a huge hit.

The 2015 pageant also revealed twists for this year, including additional two judges to help further establish the winner of the competition. The organizers include a real-time voting from the audience members on their mobile devices from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m ET. Users will just have to visit the official voting website for the pageant.

The Miss Universe pageant this year aimed "to provide the tools which help women to be their personal best," the mission statement revealed according to the official website of Miss Universe. "Self-confidence is the key. Every woman should have the confidence to stand up in any situation and declare, 'I am secure and that's what makes me beautiful!'"

UPDATE: The Miss Universe 2015 winner was just announced and the candidate from the Philippines, Ms. Pia Wurtzbach took home the crown after a dramatic turn of events. The host, Steve Harvey announced that he mistakenly mentioned Ms. Colombia as the winner. When in fact, the card revealed that Ariadna Gutierrez is the first runner-up, not Ms. Wurtzbach.

Miss Universe 2015 aired on Fox.

