Whether you love him or hate him, there's no doubt you know of him. And Perez Hilton at the 2015 Miss Universe Pageant epitomized the holiday season in the best way possible by wearing a Christmas-themed suit and tie combo. That's right, in a competition known for its ridiculous costumes, it seems that Hilton may have topped them all. And that is no easy feat. I mean, Miss Salvador dressed up as her nation's national bird, with the most intricate head piece I've ever seen. But Hilton was something else.

I haven't even mentioned Miss Hungary's Rubik's cube outfit. Or Miss Indonesia's dragon-inspired costume. Clearly, there have been standout style moments at the 2015 event, but on the red carpet, Hilton may have taken the cake. It only makes sense that five days from Christmas, the dude went with his holiday suit: A red two-piece with Christmas trees, snowmen, snowflakes, and more printed all over it. Of course, the matching tie had all the little details on it, too.

To top it all off, he wore red sneakers. Next to Olivia Culpo's gorgeous emerald gown with elegant cut-outs, the pair was pretty holiday ready. If I didn't know any better, I'd think Hilton was off to a Christmas costume party. Maybe this is what I should've shown up in for my office holiday party.

Ethan Miller/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

Pretty snazzy, right?

Ethan Miller/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

Of course, this isn't the first time Hilton has surprised us with his sartorial choices. Remember when he showed up at LOGO's 2012 NewNowNext Awards wearing (once again) a matching suit, except that time, he had forgotten his under shirt? Or when he dressed up as Miley Cyrus at Heidi Klum's Halloween party in 2013, wearing a nude bra and matching panty, and hair in two top mini buns? Yeah, I definitely recall both.

Evidently, Hilton's sense of fashion is just about as shy as his opinions. As in, not very. In some cases, he has definitely pushed the envelope a little bit too far, but tonight, I'm a fan of the whole look. And this is coming from someone who exclusively wears black. But, who doesn't appreciate a little kitschy ensemble like this one? Anytime an outfit can give me a chuckle, I'm a fan. Hats off to you, Perez Hilton. You won my vote for best dressed.