Bosnian-born Monika Radulovic was crowned winner of Miss Universe Australia 2015 in a fairytale ending after escaping her war torn homeland to come to Australia as a refugee when she was four.

The stunning psychology graduate, 24, beat 34 other hopefuls to take the glittering gown at the ceremony that took place in Melbourne on Friday.

Celebrities from around the country gathered in the ballroom at the Sofitel On Collins to watch the beauty queen compete for the second time before taking the title at the fifth annual Miss Universe Australia gala.

All that glitters: The 24-year-old beat 34 other hopefuls to take the home the title at the Sofitel hosted event

The 24-year-old beat 34 other hopefuls to take the home the title at the Sofitel hosted event

The natural beauty from New South Wales said she was overwhelmed with the title, as she will now represent Australia at Donald Trump's Miss Universe international final later this year.

'I don't know what I'm thinking, I just know that I'm so excited,' she told Daily Telegraph.

The runner up was 22-year-old Madeleine Cowe from Queensland, followed by 19-year-old Chanel Stewart from New South Wales in third place, while the Victorian entrants failed to make the top 10.

The stunning model and psychology university graduate from New South Wales said she was overwhelmed and excited with the title

The overjoyed brunette waved to a crowd filled with Australian celebrities and well wishers

Monika Radulovic will now represent Australia at Donald Trump's Miss Universe international final later this year

Last year's winner Tegan Martin placed the crown atop Monika's head as the winning beauty smiled with pride

As the final five contestant were announced, the trademark round of questions were asked to the girls on issues including social media, feminism, governmental response to violence, extremism and bullying.

The crowd was taken away by Radulovic's answer to the question on violence and extremism.

'I hope in 50 years time we won't be asking this question at Miss Universe Australia,' she answered.

A panel of judges including Real Housewives of Melbourne favourite Gina Liano, high profile Australian Neurosurgeon and founder of the Cure Brain Cancer Foundation, Dr Charles Teo, TV producer Bonnie Lythgo, and Sofitel Melbourne On Collins General Manager Clive Scott, marked the contestant in three categories – swimwear, eveningwear and questions and answers.

All that glitters! The model beauty couldn't keep the smile from her face

Guests at the Miss Universe Australia 2015 crowning included Jodi Anasta, MKR's Ash Pollard and Camilla Counsel, Miss Universe Australia 2013 Olivia Wells, Richard Reid, Toni Pearen, boxer Will Tomlinson, Miss Tourism Australia 2015 Georgia Gibbs, and Johnny Rollins from The Voice.

Miss Universe Australia 2014, Tegan Martin said that her win last year had truly changed her whole life.

'It's been an amazing ride and I look forward to the future,' she revealed to The Daily Telegraph.

Monika joins Jennifer Hawkins, Laura Dundovic, Rachael Finch, Jesinta Campbell, Scherri-Lee Biggs, Olivia Wells, Renae Ayris and Tegan Martin as a Miss Universe Australia titleholder.

35 ladies from around Australia competed for the Miss Universe Australia title in front of more than 450 guests

Miss Universe Australia 2015 took place at a gala ceremony in the Grand Ballroom at Sofitel Melbourne On Collins on Friday

The contestants competed in three different categories including swimwear

TV producer Bonnie Lythgo was part of the judges marking contestant in three categories; swimwear, eveningwear and questions and answers

Former Today show entertainment reporter Richard Reid was on the panel of celebrtity judges on Friday

Real Housewives of Melbourne favourite Gina Liano was part of the panel of judges at the dazzling competition ceremony in Melbourne

Former Home And Away starlet Jodi Anasta attended the event in a sexy black frock

Miss Universe Australia winners 2014 Tegan Martin and 2013 Olivia Wells turned out to watch this year's hopefuls

Miss Universe Australia 2014 winner Tegan Martin and her partner Angus Hood

My Kitchen Rules contestants Ash Pollard and Camilla Counsel on the red carpet of the annual Miss Universe Australia in Melbourne