

Donald Trump during the Miss Universe Pageant. (Jeff Bottari/AP)

That didn’t take long: About six weeks after GOP presidential contender Donald Trump sold the Miss Universe pageant to WME/IMG, the beauty pageant has found a new network: Fox.

The Miss Universe pageant will air Sunday, Dec. 20, the network announced, thanks to an agreement between Fox and IMG. The event, at which reigning Miss Universe Paulina Vega of Colombia will hand over her crown to the most worthy successor, will air from the Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas.

As you may remember, the pageant used to be co-owned by Trump and aired for years on NBC. That is, until this past June, when Trump called Mexican immigrants “rapists” during his presidential campaign announcement. Univision subsequently refused to air the Miss USA Pageant, and NBC followed suit by cutting all ties with Trump.

[How Donald Trump’s immigration comments clouded the Miss USA pageant — even though he didn’t show up]

The Miss USA pageant quickly wound up on the little-watched Reelz network. Trump was a no-show, but his recent incendiary comments clouded the event — especially as Miss Texas, Ylianna Guerra, who comes from an immigrant family, won second place.

Trump wound up purchasing all rights to the pageant from NBCUniversal (he sued Univision for $500 million for dropping the pageant) and then sold the entire thing to the Los Angeles-based entertainment company WME/IMG in September.

The pageant will air on Fox a bit earlier compared with last year; a Sunday right before Christmas isn’t exactly the ideal spot for the three-hour broadcast, but scheduling on Sundays is rough with Fox and football season. The network also picked up the domestic rights to the Miss USA pageant, which airs in the summer.

Read more:

Miss Universe pageant makes always-awkward Q&A segment worse with viewer questions

Donald Trump to Iowa: ‘What the hell are you people doing to me?’

Donald Trump has led the GOP race for 100 days. That’s no fad.