Here are the winners of #BbPilipinas2015, with Pia Wurtzbach as Bb. Pilipinas-Universe 2015 pic.twitter.com/64xwnYj2ti | via @IvyJeanVibar — ABS-CBN Lifestyle (@ABSCBNNewsLife) March 15, 2015

MANILA -- Third time's the charm for Pia Alonzo Wurtzbach who finally barged into the winner's circle of the Binibining Pilipinas, taking the crown for Binibibing Pilipinas Universe at the Araneta Coliseum on Sunday.

Wurtzbach, 25, has joined the popular beauty pageant twice before trying her luck again this year.

The professional model, who hails from Cagayan de Oro, will represent the Philippines in the Miss Universe pageant.

For the question and answer portion, Wurtzbach was asked about her thoughts on Internet censorship by Camarines Sur Rep. Leni Robredo.

"I think that we should be careful with what we post online, especially our thoughts and our opinions that we don't hurt anybody, especially selfies. We have to be careful with what we post, especially with our bodies and our faces. So always think before you click," Wurtzbach answered.

But this year's Cinderella story belonged to Janicel Lubina, who was crowned Binibining Pilipinas International.

"My mother was a maid. I can't be a maid forever and get stuck in the province," 19-year-old lass from Palawan said before she auditioned for this year's beauty contest.

Lubina was also named Best in Swimsuit and Best in Evening Gown.

The other winners on Sunday were: Ann Lorraine Colis, who was crowned Binibining Pilipinas Tourism; Christi Lynn McGarry, who was named Binibining Pilipinas Intercontinental; and Rogelie Catacutan, who won Binibining Pilipinas Supranational.

Hannah Ruth Lulu Sison was judged first runner-up, while Kimverlyn Suiza was second runner-up.

Pre-pageant favorite Teresita "Winwyn" Marquez, the daughter of celebrity couple Joey Marquez and Alma Moreno, made it to the Top 15 but finished outside the winner's circle. She also bagged the Jag award.

Other special awards were won by Cannielle Faith Santos (Manila Bulletin award); Kylie Verzosa (Philippine Airlines award); and Wurtzbach, who was also named Bb. Creamsilk.