The identities of the 11 delegates competing for Miss Guyana Universe 2015 will be revealed this Sunday as the organizers stage the first of 4 events leading up to the crowning on November 15.



Guyana360.com was told that the candidates have responded well to their training over the past few weeks and are currently being coached for their first public event this weekend.



Competitors include 2 University of Guyana (UG) students, a 2nd year Guyana School of Agriculture (GSA) student, an Auditor from Citizens Banks and a Ministry of Foreign Affairs employee.



The corporate community has been responding favorably with regards to sponsorship of individual delelgates but the organizers have noted that additional support is needed to ensure that all delegates are fully prepared for the three preliminary events as well as pageant night.



This year has seen the highest turnout of candadates in the history of the local franchise and there is confidence that they will retain the required standards for eligibility on the final night.



The winner of this year’s pageant wll receive a total of $4M which includes $1M in cash and 2 years tuition at the University of Guyana in addition to the coveted opportunity to represent Guyana at the Miss Universe Pageant.



Guyana360.com was told that up until Wednesday evening organizers were working to finalize the venue for the launch which is said to be an invitational event.



Text: Guyana360.com Staff Writer/Photo Keron Bruce



October 22, 2015



------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Miss Guyana Universe launch rescheduled



Organizers of the Miss Guyana Universe 2015 pageant have rescheduled the pageant launch from Sunday October 25 to a new date to be announced.



Sunday's launch was intended for members of the media, relatives of the delegates and special invitees but up to two days before the last scheduled date organizers were working to finalize a venue for the event.



Guyana360.com understands that this is the second rescheduling of the event which was originally set for Wednesday October 21 and was to be the first of 3 preliminary events leading up to the crowning.



Concerns are being raised about the delay in presenting the delegates to the public since the pageant is set for November 15 (3 weeks from today) and support is still required from corporate Guyana to ensure that all contestants are sponsored.



This year has seen the highest turnout of candadates in the history of the local franchise and there is confidence that they will all retain the required standards for eligibility on the final night.



Competitors for Miss Guyana Universe 2015 include 2 University of Guyana (UG) students, a 2nd year Guyana School of Agriculture (GSA) student, an Auditor from Citizens Banks a Ministry of Foreign Affairs employee and an employee of the Guyana Revenue Authority.



Guyana360.com Staff Writer

October 25, 2015