Miss Earth Miss Intercontinental Miss Universe Miss Universe Slovenskej Republiky Miss Universe Slovenskej Republiky 2015 Miss Universe 2015 Miss Earth 2015 Anita Polgariova Denisa Vysnovska Dominika Zemanova Finals Slovakia Europe

Miss Universe Slovenskej Republiky 2015 (Miss Universe Slovakia 2015 or Miss Universe Slovak Republic 2015) finale started off with a grand opening by introducing the twelve beautiful contestants. At the conclusion of the finals, Denisa Vyšnovská from Prievidze was adjudged the winner , and was crowned Miss Universe Slovenskej Republiky 2015. Denisa, who is 20 years of age and stands tall at 176 cm, competed with eleven other contestants to win the coveted title. She succeeds and was crowned by Silvia Prochádzková, the reigning queen. She will now represent Slovakia at Miss Universe 2015 pageant. Her court included Anita Polgáriová from Roznava, the first runner-up and Miss Earth Slovakia 2015, and Dominika Zemanová from Bratislava, the second runner-up and Miss Intercontinental Slovakia 2015. The runners-up will go on to compete in Miss Earth 2015, and Miss Intercontinental 2015 respectively. A number of special awards were also given at the finals, and the winners of these awards are - Miss Mary Kay (Best Face) - Denisa Vyšnovská Miss CHI Biosilk (Best Hair) - Martina Danková Miss Tip divákov RTVS (Viewer's Choice Award) - Denisa Vyšnovská Miss Media - Veronika Šebáková Miss Emma - Denisa Vyšnovská Miss Cambridge Weight Plan - Anita Polgáriová The pageant commenced with the official Evening gown round, where the beauties sashayed the runway in their spectacular white gowns. The splendid finals also had a series of musical performances by famous artists. After the evening gown competition, the vivacious beauties set the stage on fire as they walked the ramp in their swimsuits. The jury included Silvia Chovancová Lakatošová (the pageant director), Boris Kollár, Iveta Nemcová, Václav Mika & Jindrich Stanek. Well, the most deserving of all and the most popular contestant finished as the winner. What do you think of Denisa's prospects at Miss Universe 2015?