The finale of Miss Brazil 2015 held on November 18’ 2015 at the Citibank Hall, concluded with the crowning of Marthina Brandt as the winner. Marthina, hailing from the state of Rio Grande do Sul, has been the crowd’s favourite since the beginning. She was also among our Top 10 favourites to win the crown. This was the 61st edition of the Brazil’s most prestigious beauty pageant and the winner, Marthina Brandt, will compete for the Miss Universe 2015 title on December 20 in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Marthina succeeds Melissa Gurgel, Miss Brazil 2014. Melissa competed at the Miss Universe 2014 pageant and was among the Top 15 finalists. 23 years old Marthina is a law student. The finale started with the 27 contestants walking the stage looking all graceful in casual attire. The introduction was followed by showing the video, as to how the beauties were selected from all across the country. Talking about her facial features, she has the kind of beauty that will bind you in an enchanted charm of grace and elegance. Her styling and wardrobe is tremendous.

Also See : The Other Winners of Miss Brazil 2015

Brazil is currently the third strongest nation in the world of pageantry. The country has won all the Big4 crowns; one of the few countries to have done so which includes Venezuela and the Philippines. Brazil also boasts two Miss Universe titleholders – Iêda Maria Vargas (1963) Martha Vasconcellos (1968). At the same event, Sabrina Meyer, Miss Santa Catarina was titled as the first runner-up, and Jessica Vilela from Sao Paulo was adjudged second runner-up. The other two contestants who made it to the Top 5 finalists are –

Manoella Alves - Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil

Camilla Della Valle Obersteiner ­- Mato Grosso, Brazil

Know more about Marthina Brandt Miss Brazil 2015

Mathina will be a strong contender at the Miss Universe 2015 pageant, which is already been filling up with contestants who are exceptionally talented and undoubtedly superb. It seems like countries this year have sent their best bet for the Miss Universe 2015 pageant. The competition is tough, front runners are many, and time is too less. So, do you have your favourites marked yet? Who are you rooting for? Do you think Marthina has what it takes to be the next Miss Universe?