Miss South Africa Miss Universe Miss South Africa 2015 Miss Universe 2015 Refilwe Mthimunye South Africa Africa

Refilwe Fifi Mthimunye who was adjudged Miss South Africa 2015 first runner up, has been appointed Miss Universe South Africa 2015 on 29’ October. She will now represent South Africa at the sixty-fourth Miss Universe Pageant to be held on December 20 in Las Vegas, Nevada, USA. The 22-years-old hails from Bronkhorstspruit, Tshwane. She was busy doing her third year LLB Law at the University of South Africa when she heard she had made the Miss South Africa 2015 Top 12. Asking about the reason she is studying law, she says that she feels, to be a great leader and politician one needs to know the laws oneself. “I’m doing my degree part time as I was also pursuing a modelling career with the help of Alushi Models Management.” - she added. The South African beauty has successfully combined her two passions so far. KNOW MORE ABOUT REFILWE FIFI MTHIMUNYE She was Miss Sundown’s second princess held in 2013 and was also placed as second princess in 2012 for Miss Varsity College, Pretoria. She says - “As young women of today we have many opportunities to make our mark in the universe. I say we take advantage of these opportunities so we can raise future leaders.” “We need to stand together and should not allow society to dictate our roles. Everything we do, we should put God first and the rest will follow.” She added. Usually the winner of Miss South Africa represents the country at both Miss World and Miss Universe pageant. As we all know this year, both the international pageants will take place simultaneously. Miss World will take place on nineteenth December in Sanya, China, whereas Miss Universe will be held on the twentieth December. Therefore, Liesl Laurie, Miss South Africa 2015, will be heading to China to represent South Africa at the Miss World Pageant. While, Refilwe Fifi Mthimunye will be in Las Vegas for the finale. What do you?? Will Mthimunye be the one to succeed Paulina Vega from Colombia, Miss Universe 2014?