PARIS (USA TODAY) — Two suspects in the terror attack on a satirical newspaper were cornered in a small industrial town northeast of Paris Friday and told police they wanted to die as martyrs, but agreed to allow police to evacuate a nearby school.

The suspects, Cherif Kouachi, 32, and his older brother Said, 34, took refuge in a small printing warehouse in the town of Dammartin-en-Goele and, according to a town official, took at least one person hostage.

"They said they want to die as martyrs," Yves Albarello, a local lawmaker who said he was inside the police command post in the town, told French television station i-Tele.

MORE: Worldwide outpouring of support for Charlie Hebdo victims

MORE: White House offers assistance to France in wake of terror attack

In Paris, meanwhile, a separate gunman believed to be linked to the killing of a policewoman south of the capital on Thursday had also taken as many as five people hostage at a kosher supermarket, according to AFP, the French news agency. Reuters reports that at least one person was injured in the incident.

The second hostage-taking in eastern Paris at Porte de Vincennes came after French police said that there is a "connection" between the pair accused in the assault on the newspaper Charlie Hebdo and a suspect identified in the shooting of the policewoman, according to the AFP news agency. That suspect disappeared for a day after fleeing into a metro.

As the second drama began to unfold to the south, Audrey Taupenas, spokeswoman for Dammartin-en-Goele, told the Associated Press that officials established phone contact with the two brothers who agreed to evacuate a nearby school.

French TV showed at least eight buses lined up outside the town in preparation for removing as many as 1,000 school children.

The two brothers are wanted for the killing of 12 people at the Charlie Hebdonewspaper in Paris on Wednesday in retaliation for what they said was the publishing of cartoons denigrating the prophet Mohammed.

After a full day on the run, the Kouachi brothers were tracked to Dammartin-en-Goele, 25 miles northeast of the capital, which is located close to the flight path of Charles de Gaulle airport. The airport , which is 7 miles away, closed two runways to arrivals to avoid interfering in the standoff, an airport spokesman said.

In the town, schools went into lockdown and local officials appealed to residents to stay inside their houses.

Xavier Castaing, the chief Paris police spokesman, said the suspects were holed up inside CTF Creation Tendance Decouverte, a printing house. Town hall spokeswoman Taupenas said the gunmen had at least one hostage.

The massive manhunt came to a head earlier Friday after the suspects stole a Peugeot car, a French security official told the AP. The official spoke on condition of anonymity because the situation was still developing. The pair then exchanged gunfire at a roadblock and fled to the nearby industrial town.

Police had concentrated on the region after a clerk at a gasoline station said the pair robbed him at gunpoint on Thursday.

After fleeing to Dammartin-en-Goele, the brothers approached a salesman identified only as Didier as he was preparing to enter the family-run printing and advertising firm in the town, local French radio reports.

Didier said a person who he didn't immediately recognize as one of the brothers, but who was heavily armed and resembled French special forces, introduced himself as a policeman and said, "You should go. We don't kill civilians anyway."

Didier then left and called the police.

Over the past two days, authorities have begun to piece together the background of the two suspects. The two were on a U.S. no-fly watch list, said a U.S. official who was not authorized to speak on the case publicly. One of them, Said, traveled to Yemen in 2011, raising the prospect that he had training or direction, the official said.

A third suspect, Hamyd Mourad, 18, surrendered at a police station early Thursday in Charleville-Mezieres, a small town in France's eastern Champagne region, Paris prosecutor's spokeswoman Agnes Thibault-Lecuivre said.

Mourad's role in the attack, if any, remains unclear. The teenager has an alibi, telling authorities he was at school at the time, the BBC reported.

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder will travel to Paris this weekend to attend an International meeting Sunday. The French minister of the interior called the conference in response to the attacks. The meeting will include discussions on addressing terrorist threats, foreign fighters and countering violent extremism.

Contributing: Maya Vidon and Doug Stanglin, USA TODAY; Associated Press