Toronto’s French community braved frigid temperatures Wednesday evening for a sombre candlelight vigil to commemorate those slain in a terrorist attack on the offices of the weekly satirical newspaper, Charlie Hebdo. “I don’t think people understand how crucial this newspaper is to French culture,” Marc Albert Cormier, an elected consular representative for French citizens abroad, said at the vigil. “It’s a very provocative, almost insulting newspaper in some ways, but it’s all about freedom of speech — it’s all about jolting you out of everyday perceptions and ideas.” Shivering in parkas and scarves in front of the French consulate at Yonge and Bloor Sts., attendees clutched candles, French flags and posters that read “Je suis Charlie”: a now-popular sentiment meant to express solidarity with the newspaper. “What happened today is absolutely tragic beyond words.”

Article Continued Below

Toronto’s French community maintains close ties through Facebook, said Florent Guérard, the vigil’s organizer. As soon as he heard of the attacks Wednesday morning, he created the Facebook event and by the afternoon, hundreds of expatriates like himself had committed to attend. “It was spontaneous,” Guérard, who works in finance, said of the vigil. “There was a need for the French community to gather around and mourn those victims and maybe to think about what (the attack) represents for us.” To Guérard, it was clearly an assault on freedom of speech. That so many people came out despite the bitter cold shows his compatriots’ solidarity with a paper that took such a strong stance against extremism, he added.

Joshua Margulies, a French exchange student at the University of Toronto, attended the vigil with several of his peers. “Despite the fact that we’re so far away, we’re still in our souls in France and with the people who died,” he said while clutching a candle. “Those people who died were actually the cartoonists who stood most forcefully for freedom of speech. The fact that they died is a very tragic symbol for France and the liberal world. We want to show our support for those values which they stood for.” Nora Maachou, a French transplant to Toronto, attended the vigil with signs that read “I am Charlie” in Russian, Arabic and French. “Today I’m here because freedom of speech was attacked,” she said. “And I think about them also as people. And I think about their families.” Isabella Meline, another French citizen, said her first thought was for the journalists. “My second thought is for all the Muslim people who are going to suffer from this, even though they had nothing to do with it.”

Read more about: