The two Charlie Hebdo gunmen were trained and indoctrinated by a network of French Islamists with links to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Isil), it emerged on Thursday night.

It transpired that Chérif Kouachi, 32, whom French police are chasing along with his brother Saïd, 34, for the murder of 12 people at the offices of Charlie Hebdo, has links to one of America’s most wanted foreign terrorists.

Chérif, who liked to be known as “Abou Issen”, belonged to a group of budding Islamists in the early 2000s considered “pioneers” in foreign jihad and known as the “Buttes-Chaumont” network, after the park in the 19th arrondissement of Paris where they would meet.

Raised in care in Rennes after his French Algerian parents died when he was young, he returned to Paris with his brother in his teens and found work as a pizza delivery man, and lived in the 19th arrondissement.

While there he became close friends with Thamer Bouchnak , a Tunisian-Frenchman who was turning increasingly towards militant Islam. The pair were united by their distaste for the war in Iraq. The photos of torture from Abu Ghraib prison are said to have particularly incensed them.

The two men were ripe pickings for Farid Benyettou, a known jihadi recruiter for Iraq, operating in the 19th arrondissement.

Jean-Julien Xavier-Rolai, the public prosecutor, described Benyettou as their “spiritual guide” and “the link between the suburbs of Fallujah and the 19th arrondissement”. Mr Xavier-Rolai is now the justice adviser to Bernard Cazeneuve, interior minister.

Chérif had met Benyettou at the Addawa mosque near their homes in Paris in the largely Arab working-class district.

Chérif and Bouchnak were both arrested in January 2005 as they prepared to fly to Damascus, and on to fight in Iraq.

Despite claiming to have been “conned” by radical Islam, during his time in prison awaiting trial from January that year to October 2006 in Fleury-Mérogis, Chérif met his future mentor, Djamel Beghal, who also goes by the name of Abou Hamza.

Farid Benyettou, a known jihadi recruiter for Iraq operating in the 19th arrondissement (François Bouchon / Le Figaro)

Beghal was serving a 10-year sentence for plotting to blow up the US embassy in Paris in 2001. It transpires he also had links to London’s Finsbury Park mosque, a once notorious breeding ground for Islamist radicals.

French intelligence agents photographed Chérif playing football with Beghal in Murat, in the Cantal region of central France, where he was on house arrest, in 2010. Two other Islamists were present: Ahmed Laidouni and Farid Melouk.

Chérif’s trial began in March 2008, alongside other members of the Buttes-Chaumont network, and while he did not deny that they intended to fight in Iraq, he said he was later disillusioned.

He received a three-year prison sentence, with 18 months suspended, for terrorist activities, but was released as he had already served time.

Chérif would later meet an even more notorious figure: Salim Benghalem, a Frenchman of Algerian descent who is among America’s most wanted international terrorists.

Benghalem met and befriended Chérif’s friend, Bouchnak, while the pair shared a cell in 2008 in Fresnes prison following his conviction for attempted murder. After his release, Beghalem extended his influence to the other members of the Buttes-Chaumont network, according to intelligence sources cited by Le Monde.

Salim Benghalem is among America’s most wanted international terrorists

In particular, he was part of a group of Islamists in a jail-break plot to free Smaïn Ait Ali Belkacem, sentenced in November 2002 to life imprisonment for his involvement in the bombing of the suburban RER train station at Musée d’Orsay in October 1995 in which 30 people were injured. The name of Chérif’s brother Saïd cropped up on the sidelines of the investigation but charges against both brothers were dropped due to lack of evidence.

There was little in his early life to suggest Benghalem would turn into a hardened terrorist. After an apparently calm upbringing in Cachan, near Paris, Benghalem suddenly and unexpectedly fled to Algeria in 2001 after being accused of murder and attempted murder as part of a fight between rival gangs.

After returning to France in 2002, he spent five years in custody and was was sentenced in 2007 to 11 years in prison, but was released in 2010 thanks to his “good behaviour” and “repentance”.

But in 2012, leaving behind a wife and two young children, he travelled to Syria, where he told relatives by phone that he had joined Isil.

Benghalem is thought to have last contacted his family in August 2014, from Aleppo, as bombings raged.

In October last year the US State Department singled him out as one of 10 wanted “foreign terrorist fighters”, describing him as “a Syria-based French extremist and Isil member” as well as an executioner.

Another violently dangerious individual linked to Chérif is Boubaker al-Hakim, known as Abou Mouqatel. Hakim is a French Islamist of Tunisian origin, born in 1983, who grew up in the 19th arrondissement.

It was here that he is thought to have become a key figure in the Buttes-Chaumont jihadi network, where he met Kouachi..

Hakim is suspected of being deeply implicated in the recruitment and logistical organisation of French jihadists to fight in Iraq.

He first travelled to Iraq himself in 2002, returning up to four times and according to Jean-Pierre Filiu, an expert at Sciences-Po University in Paris, he recruited militants to fight in Fallujah, the Iraqi city that became an al-Qaeda stronghold in 2004.

Boubaker al-Hakim, known as Abou Mouqatel

In 2008 both Hakim and Chérif were arrested and convicted in Paris for their role in the network.

Hakim was sentenced to seven years for running a way station in Damascus for young French Muslims en route to fight US forces in Iraq.

Mr Filiu said: “Hakim, and no doubt Kouachi, rejoined al-Qaeda’s Iraqi networks after they were released from prison and accompanied them in their transformation into Daesh [the Arabic name for Isil].

“The combat experience they acquired was useful in the cold-blooded assassinations they have carried out since.”

Hakim’s 2008 arrest and imprisonment was thought to have broken up the Buttes-Chaumont network.

But in 2013 he appeared in Tunisia, where he murdered two of the country’s left-wing opposition politicians – Chokri Belaid and Mohamed Brahmi – on February 6 and July 25, 2013.

Hakim claimed responsibility for the murders in a video on behalf of isil released last month and filmed in IS territory somewhere in Iraq or Syria, declaring: “We will return and kill several of you. You won’t live in peace until Tunisia applies Islamic law.”

Mr Filiu said that Hakim “represents the link between the Kouachi brothers and [Isial]”, adding: “It is impossible that an operation on the scale of the one that led to the massacre at Charlie Hebdo was not sponsored by Daesh”.