On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

News orgs censor Charlie Hebdo cartoons after attack

Several news organizations are being criticized for altering photos of Charlie Hebdo covers in light of Wednesday's attack on the satirical French magazine.

The New York Daily News posted a 2011 photo of Charlie Hebdo editor and publisher Stéphane (Charb) Charbonnier, who was killed in the attack, holding an issue of the magazine — but with the front cover blurred. The photo, from Getty, is not censored on Getty’s wire and shows the cover featuring a cartoon of Muhammad saying, “100 lashes if you don’t die of laughter.”

The Telegraph originally posted an image of a woman reading the magazine on its live blog, also with the front cover blurred. The image was then apparently removed from the live blog entirely. The Telegraph also posted photos of Charbonnier holding a copy of Charlie Hebdo but cropped out the front cover.

The Telegraph and New York Daily News did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

CNN sent an email to staff on Wednesday afternoon noting that the network will not be showing images of the cartoons and advising staff to avoid close-up shots of demonstrators holding up copies of the magazine that make the cartoons clearly legible.

"Although we are not at this time showing the Charlie Hebdo cartoons of the Prophet considered offensive by many Muslims, platforms are encouraged to verbally describe the cartoons in detail. This is key to understanding the nature of the attack on the magazine and the tension between free expression and respect for religion," CNN senior editorial director Richard Griffiths wrote in the memo.

A CNN spokesperson also said in a statement that the network was continuously discussing how best to address and show the images related to the attack.

The Associated Press has cropped versions of a photo featuring Charbonnier from 2011 holding up the paper. The cropped-out portion is a cartoon of what appears to be an orthodox Jew pushing Muhammad in a wheelchair saying, “you must not mock us” with the title “Untouchables 2.” In an email, AP spokesperson Paul Colford said “it’s been a longstanding policy” that the wire does not “move deliberately provocative images.”

NBC, MSNBC, and The New York Times are among other outlets choosing not to show the cartoons.

Other outlets like Bloomberg, The Huffington Post and The Daily Beast are going in the opposite direction, publishing slideshows of some of Charlie Hebdo’s most provocative cartoons.

AFP news editor Dave Clark said on Twitter that if a newspaper has run AFP photos of Charlie Hebdo and it is pixelated, it was the paper's choice and not AFP's. Clark included a photo of Charbonnier holding a Charlie Hebdo issue with a Muhammad cartoon on its cover.

This post has been updated.

Hadas Gold is a reporter at Politico.