Barack Obama, the US President, said: “France, and the great city of Paris where this outrageous attack took place, offer the world a timeless example that will endure well beyond the hateful vision of these killers”.

His words were echoed by Secretary of State John Kerry: “They may wield weapons, but we in France and in the United States share a commitment to those who wield something that is far more powerful: not just a pen, but a pen that represents an instrument of freedom, not fear,” he said.

“Free expression and a free press are core values they are universal values, principles that can be attacked but never eradicated.”

Chancellor Merkel said: “What has happened in Paris today is indeed a barbarous attack against all of the values we share.

“All of us that live in Europe strongly condemn these attacks and our thoughts go out to the French people and particularly to those who have lost loved one in this horrendous attack.

“This is an attack against the values we all hold dear, values by which we stand, values of freedom of the press, freedom in general and the dignity of man.

“And again our thoughts are with the French people with all of those who have lost loved one in this horrific attack and everything we can do to help the French we will certainly do.”

Italy

Pope Francis has offered prayers at an early morning Mass for the victims of the terrorist attack on the offices of Charlie Hebdo.

Speaking in the chapel of Casa Santa Marta, his residence within the Vatican, the Pope said: "[Wednesday's] terror attack in Paris brings to mind so much cruelty - human cruelty - so much terrorism, both isolated [incidents of] terrorism and of state terrorism."

"We pray, in this Mass, for the victims of this cruelty - so many of them - and we pray also for the perpetrators of such cruelty, that the Lord might change their heart."

Russia

Usually hawkish politicians have seized on the attacks as a reason for France and Russia to find common ground. Tweeting in French, Alexei Pushkov, the usually abrasive chairman of the Duma's foreign policy committee, said: "Terrorist attacks in France and Russia come from the same source. [It is] one more reason to cooperate, rather than be in conflict.”

Russian President Vladimir Putin has condemned "this cynical crime" and offered his condolences to the victims and their families.

Norway

The murder of 77 people in Norway in 2011, was committed by a far-right fanatic, Anders Behring Breivik, rather than Islamist militants.

Prime Minister Erna Solberg sent a condolence letter to French President Francois Hollande.

It read: "On behalf of the Norwegian government. I offer condolences after the hideous assassination of editorial team of Charlie Hebdo. This attack in Paris touches everyone who wants to keep free speech alive. We will not let us scare to self-censorship.

"Let me express our full solidarity and our deepest sympathy with the victims and their families, as well as with the French people.”

Egypt

Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt's president, sent condolences via telegram to Francois Hollande. He said: "Terrorism is an international phenomenon that should be faced and terminated through joint international effort."

Al-Azhar, the prestigious Sunni Islam centre of learning in Cairo, condemned the "criminal attack," saying that "Islam denounces any violence", according Egypt's state news agency MENA.

"Arab League chief Nabil al-Arabi strongly condemns the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo newspaper in Paris," the League said after gunmen stormed the weekly's offices.

Saudi Arabia

A Saudi official described it as a: “Cowardly terrorist act which Islam as well as other religions reject.

“[Saudi Arabia] offers its condolences to the families of the victims as well as the government and people of the French republic and wishes a speedy recovery for the wounded,” the official said.

Lebanon

Prime Minister Tammam Salam slammed the “unacceptable and unjustifiable terrorist act.”

He expressed his “sympathy with the families of the victims during this painful circumstance” in a fax to Francois Hollande.

Former Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri also denounced the assault, saying that the perpetrators actually targeted the education and values of Islam.

“If what was attributed to eyewitnesses about the identity of the perpetrators is true, then those who use the name of the Holy Prophet as a means to ask for revenge and commit the most heinous acts, are a group of misguided people who do not only aim to harm Islamic-French relations, but also target Islam as a religion, values, education and permanent calls for moderation, dialogue and integration between religions.”

Hariri added: “In all cases, the attack on the French capital is a clumsy stab that harms Islam and hundreds of thousands of Muslims who have been living in France for decades, and benefitting from social, political and human rights.”

India

The Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, condemned the “despicable attack”. He tweeted: “Condemnable & despicable attack in Paris. Our solidarity with people of France. My thoughts are with families of those who lost their lives.”

India’s Minister of Finance, Arun Jaitley, also deplored the attack as he tweeted: “Paris shooting incident is an ugly attack on humanity .It’s a wakeup call for international community to unite against terrorism.”

Australia

Tony Abbott, Australia’s prime minister, described the Charlie Hebdo attack in Paris as a “barabaric act” as Australians took to the streets to pledge support for free speech.

Mr Abbott expressed condolences to the families of victims, saying freedom of expression was the cornerstone of a free society.

“Australia stands with the people and the government of France at this difficult time,” he said.

In Melbourne, more than 1,000 people attended a protest organised by the local French community to remember the victims of the attack.

"It doesn't matter what we think about religion or politics, we just have to be together," said Maeva Siena, the protest organiser, whose friend was among the injured in Paris.

Japan

Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe expressed "profound shock and indignation" at Wednesday's deadly gun attack in a message delivered to French President Francois Hollande, the Japanese Foreign Ministry said this morning.

Abe said: “We categorically condemn any cowardly act of terrorism no matter what the motive may be” and “we mourn all the victims and offer condolences from our heart to their families.”

“At this difficult time, Japan is with France,” he said.

Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida also delivered a similar message to his French counterpart Laurent Fabius.

Following the shooting in Paris, the Japanese Foreign Ministry issued a travel advisory Wednesday night to people traveling to, or staying in, France, urging caution when visiting department stores, markets or other places that draw a large number of people.

South Korea

On Thursday, South Korea strongly condemned the "shocking terror attack" on a French satirical magazine, vowing to join international efforts to fight terrorism.

“The government cannot hide its shock over the deaths of many people including police officers in the act of terrorism on the headquarters of Charlie Hebdo and strongly denounces this terrorist act,” the foreign ministry said in a statement.

"The South Korean government prays for the repose of the victims and offers its deep condolences to the bereaved families and the French people."

"Under the firm stance that terrorism is an unjustifiable, anti-civil and anti-human act that must be eradicated, South Korea supports the French government's fight against terrorism," it said.

The South Korean government will take active part in the international community's efforts to uproot terrorism, it added.

South Africa

Clayson Monyela, a spokesman for the South African government, condemned the "calculated and barbaric" attack.

"Deliberate attacks against journalists and members of the public contravene international law and constitute a crime against humanity," he said.

"South Africa stands firmly with the international community by unequivocally condemning all terrorism and will continue to support regional and international efforts to address the scourge of terrorism in all its forms."

Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, the chairman of the African Union, condemned the "horrific and barbaric" attack.

"Dr Dlamini Zuma described the tragic incident as a clear attack on press freedom and all other forms freedom of expression," the AU said in a statement. "This act of terrorism, as with all others that continue to be perpetuated around the world, must be condemned and fought against with unreserved energy by the international community."

China

A spokesperson for China's Foreign Ministry said Beijing was "profoundly shocked by the terrorist attack".

"We strongly condemn that. The Chinese side mourns the victims and extends sincere sympathy to the bereaved families and the injured. The Chinese side resolutely opposes terrorism in all manifestations and supports the efforts by the French side to safeguard security of the country," he added.

The Chinese statement did not touch on the issue of freedom of speech.

Israel

Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, attacked radical Islam on Thursday in a meeting with Borge Brende, the visiting Norwegian foreign minister.

"Yesterday's murderous attack on free expression clearly demonstrates the disdain of radical Islam for the values we hold dear," he said. "We cherish freedom and tolerance; they worship tyranny and terror. And through this terror they seek to impose a new dark age on humanity.

"These extremists are part of a global movement and this necessitates a global response. I believe that with the strength of our resolve and the unity of our action, we can defeat this threat to our common civilization. And what the battle against terror requires is courage, clarity and consistency."

In comments hinting at a rebuke over the recent votes in European legislatures - including Britain - in favour of recognizing Palestinian statehood, he added: "Israel is being attacked by the very same forces that attack Europe. Israel stands with Europe. Europe must stand with Israel.”

Reuven Rivlin, the Israeli president, also drew on Israel's experience in a letter of condolence to Mr Hollande.

"We all, throughout the free world, face the threat of terrorism and must stand united in the fight against those who seek to stifle free thought and continue to destroy the lives of so many, " Mr Rivlin wrote. "Sadly, I am no stranger to the horror and grief that follows such murderous attacks. We stand with France in its determination to safeguard freedom of speech and the freedom of the press that are central pillars of any democracy."

Palestinian Authority

Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian Authority leader, called the attacks a "heinous crime" in a telegram to Francois Hollande and said they were "condemned by morality and religion", according to a statement issued by his office in Ramallah.

"The president expressed to the French president and the French people, friends of Palestine, and the families of the victims, our condolences, begging mercy for the souls of the victims, wishing a speedy recovery for the injured, and patience and courage to their families," the statement said.

Moustafa Barghouti, secetary general of the Palestinian National Initiative, distanced the murders from Islam and instead compared them with the assassination of Naji al-Ali, a prominent Palestinian caricaturist who died after being shot by an unknown assailant in London in 1987.

"This attack that led to the killing of courageous journalists does not represent Islam or Muslim culture but rather represents oppressions brutality to silence the voices of free thought across the world," he said. "The (Charlie Hebdo) cartoonists Wolinski, Cabu, Charb and Tignous were killed today for their freedom and their opinions just like Palestinian cartoonist Naji Al-Ali was killed in 1987 but their voices shall never be silenced."

Naji al-Ali's death led to Margaret Thatcher, the then prime minister, ordering the London offices of Mossad closed after the Israeli foreign intelligence organisation was found to have had prior knowledge of the assassination plan through Palestinian double agents but failed to inform the British authorities.