Investigators found a cellphone on the man, a piece of paper with the flag of the Islamic State on it, and an “unequivocal handwritten claim of responsibility” in Arabic, according to Mr. Molins’s office, which said it was investigating the attack as an attempted terrorist assassination of someone in a position of public authority. The police are also investigating whether Mr. Ali had any real ties to the Islamic State.

Photo

Mr. Molins did not detail the content of the handwritten claim, but French news media reported that the man had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State and had written that he was avenging French “attacks in Syria.”

Justice Minister Christiane Taubira, speaking on the i-Télé news channel on Thursday evening, said that investigators still needed to clarify whether the attacker was radicalized or if he was mentally unstable.

“A fake explosives belt, the cries, the allegiance in his pocket, these are signs that could link him to a network, but at the same time these could be the signs of someone unbalanced,” Ms. Taubira said. “The investigation will clarify all of this.”

Ms. Taubira added that there was an “extremely heavy climate” in France that might push people with “psychological weaknesses” to act in similar ways.

The police station is in the 18th Arrondissement, a multicultural district that has a large immigrant population but that is also rapidly gentrifying.

Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve visited the station after the attack and praised the “great courage” of the police.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The episode occurred a year after gunmen carried out attacks in and near Paris, including on Charlie Hebdo and on a kosher supermarket, killing 17 people. The assault also comes less than two months after the Nov. 13 terrorist attacks here, which left 130 dead.

Photo

Most of the participants in the Nov. 13 attacks wore explosives vests, six of which were detonated that night: three at the national soccer stadium north of Paris, two at the Bataclan concert hall, and one at a restaurant in central Paris.

In addition, a man who died in a police raid on Nov. 18 on a hide-out in the northern Paris suburb of St.-Denis — who has not yet been identified but who investigators say they believe took part in the attacks — also detonated a suicide vest.

The attack on Thursday occurred a little over an hour after President François Hollande concluded a speech to forces at the Paris police department during which he warned that terrorism was still threatening the country.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Hollande thanked the police and security forces and paid tribute to the three officers who were killed in the attacks last January. “We will never forget them,” he said. “They died so that we may live free.”

Mr. Hollande added that over the past year, nearly 200 people had been barred from leaving France on suspicion of seeking to join terrorist groups in Syria or Iraq and that over 50 foreigners had been barred from entering the country.

He also urged the security and intelligence services in France to do better at cooperating with each other.

“Faced with these kinds of adversaries, it is crucial that each department work in perfect coordination, in the greatest transparency, and that they share all the information that they have,” Mr. Hollande said.