More than 1,000 Montrealers braved the bitter cold on Wednesday night to stand together outside the city’s French consulate and remember those killed in a brazen attack in Paris earlier in the day.

Temperatures of near minus-21 C greeted the huge crowd as people lit candles, embraced each other and sang the French national anthem. Many held pens or pencils above their heads in tribute to the ten journalists working at French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo who were gunned down in their offices by three men. Two police officers also died trying to stop the massacre.

“It has to stop,” said Jeff Begley, who stood near the back of the crowd. “It seems to me that the magazine was saying ‘enough of religious extremism.’ And I think everyone needs to say ‘enough.’ “

Many at the event — which was hastily organized within hours of the shooting — carried printouts of Charlie Hebdo’s most controversial cartoons featuring Muslim leaders and the Prophet Muhammad. Chants of “Charlie!” and “Liberty!” rang out as more and more people streamed out of nearby malls to join the peaceful gathering.

Earlier in the evening, a similar attempt to come together in solidarity outside Montreal city hall was marred by the still-fresh anger some were feeling in the wake of the attack.

Shouts of “Religion! Finished!” and loud boos were heard in the crowd of about 200 people as Mayor Denis Coderre called for respect and tolerance among Montrealers of every faith.





Share Gallery: Montreal vigils for victims of Charlie Hebdo shootings Tumblr Pinterest Google Plus Reddit LinkedIn Email

GALLERY: Gallery: Montreal vigils for victims of Charlie Hebdo shootings Hundreds of people braved the cold during a vigil organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. A banner saying Je suis Charlie is installed at the top of the City Hall in memory of Charlie Hebdo's victims. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

Montreal mayor Denis Coderre was among the supporters who braved the cold during a vigil organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. A large banner Je suis Charlie has been installed at the top of Montreal City Hall in support of the Charlie Hebdo's victims. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

Chantal Pelosse, left, Wilfred Savoy, Jemery Dupont and Justine Janvier hold candles and signs during vigil in support of the victims of the Charlie Hebdo terrorist attack in Paris, outside City Hall in Montreal, Wednesday January 7, 2015. John Mahoney/Montreal Gazette

Hundreds of people braved the cold during a vigil organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. A large banner saying Je suis Charlie was installed at the top of city hall in memory of Charlie Hebdo's victims. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

French consul general Bruno Clerc, left, walks towards the supporters while Mayor Denis Coderre looks on, right, during a vigil organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

Chantal Pelosse, Wilfred Savoy, middle and Jeremy Dupont, right, were among the supporters who braved the cold during a vigil organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. Banners saying Je suis Charlie were held by supporters in memory of Charlie Hebdo's victims. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

Montreal Mayor Denis Coderre braved the cold during a vigil organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. A large banner saying Je suis Charlie was installed at the top of the city hall in memory of Charlie Hebdo's victims. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

A vigil was organized by Montreal City Hall on Wednesday night in support of the victims of the terrorist attack in Paris. A large banner Je suis Charlie has been installed at the top of Montreal City Hall in support of the Charlie Hebdo's victims. Marie-France Coallier/Montreal Gazette

A woman holds a candle and a Je Suis Charlie sign as she participates in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

Justine Westelynck participates in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

A man holds colouring pencils above his head as he participates in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

A group of women brave the -23C temperatures to participate in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

Pencils and flowers form a small shrine in the snow during a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

A women displays Je Suis Charlie as she participates in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

A woman stands solemnly as she takes part in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

A crowd of several thousand people participate in a candle light vigil outside the French Consulate in Montreal on Wednesday January 7, 2015. Montrealers gathered in support of the victims of the terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris earlier today that left 12 people dead and 11 injured. Allen McInnis/Montreal Gazette

“Terrorism is the act of individuals,” he said, prompting more boos and shouts of “no!”

At the back of the crowd, someone yelled, “What are you afraid of?”

The mayor, who continued speaking over the dissenting voices, was joined at the vigil by representatives from the Muslim community, members of city council and French consul general Bruno Clerc.

Clerc spoke of his country’s commitment to free expression and democracy, which he said will remain unwavering.

“We will pursue the fight for liberty and democracy,” he shouted through a megaphone. “Long live democracy! Long live Charlie! I am Charlie!”

A huge banner hung on the front of city hall echoed his sentiments, bearing the words “I am Charlie.”

The anti-religious outbursts during the event were just the latest example of the backlash against Muslim communities in response to recent attacks around the world. Coderre called repeatedly for calm and tolerance as his speech was interrupted.

“Today, we are all French!” the mayor said, adding that the city offers its full support to the French people.

Nearby, French-born Sylvie Chaillou wiped away tears.

“I grew up with Charlie Hebdo,” said a shaken Chaillou, who has lived in Quebec for 26 years.

“This is hell. To kill people because they dared to open their mouths or to pick up a pen.”

There are thousands of writers all over the world who are censored, she added, but France “is supposed to be a democracy. A republic where people can express themselves openly. And now this. What’s next? Auto-censorship?”

mmuise@montrealgazette.com

Twitter.com/monique_muise