When Fanny Ratisseau woke up on Wednesday morning in Calgary, she turned on the French news, as she does every day.

She was shocked at what she saw.

Soon, Ratisseau set to work helping to organize a Calgary vigil in honour of the victims of Wednesday’s brutal terror attack at a controversial French newspaper in Paris.

“We’re against terrorism and want to show them that they won’t win the battle. It’s horrible everything that happened, but they won’t win,” Ratisseau told a crowd gathered at Olympic Plaza on Wednesday evening.

“Maybe we lost a battle today, but we will win in the end. All together we’re more than them,” she said.

An estimated 100 people, many holding black sheets of paper that read “Je suis Charlie,” gathered at Olympic Plaza on Wednesday in support of the victims of the French attack.

Twelve people were killed and four were critically wounded when masked gunmen stormed the offices of weekly French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo on Wednesday, in what has been labelled France’s deadliest postwar terrorist attack.

“Today is a very sad day. We felt the need to all get united to show our solidarity, our support with the victims in France even if we’re far away from our country,” said Ratisseau, who is from Paris but has lived in Canada for three years.

MP Joan Crockatt attended Wednesday’s rally and told the crowd it’s important that citizens unite in supporting the people affected by what she labelled a deplorable act.

“It’s an act against us all and it’s an act against free speech,” she said.

Roy Klassen, Honorary Consul for France in Calgary, spoke briefly and told vigil attendees he was saddened by Wednesday’s events in France.

Damien Coroller, who is from France but has lived in Calgary for five years, attended the vigil and said he was completely shocked when he heard about the attacks.

“I couldn’t believe that something like this could happen to people…just for drawing,” he said.

“I came to prove that we should not be afraid by these terrorists killing people.”

Lila Kaidomar, director of Alliance Francaise Calgary, said many of the organization’s members and employees were planning to attend the important local Charlie Hebdo vigil.

“What happened in France (Wednesday) morning, it’s an attack against freedom,” she said.

“It’s not only against the French journalists or the French people, it’s against freedom … Everyone, all over the world, is concerned at what’s happening.”

AKlingbeil@calgaryherald.com