Skip to comments.

Charlie Hebdo tragedy: Former India UP State Minister offers Rs 51 crores ($8MM) to attackers

News Nation ^ | 1/08/2015 | News Nation Bureau

Posted on by Jan_Sobieski

The whole world is in complete shock after the terrorist attack that struck Paris on Wednesday, but this former minister from Lucknow, Haji Yakub Quereshi, stirred a controversy by saying that he will reward the attackers by giving them Rs 51 cores (~$8,000,000,000).



According to reports published in a Hindi newspaper, Yakub said, "I will reward the attackers who killed Charlie Hebdo Editor, cartoonist of the infamous Prophet poster, with Rs 51 crores (8 Million Dollars)."...



(Excerpt) Read more at newsnation.in ...

TOPICS:

Crime/Corruption

Foreign Affairs

News/Current Events

KEYWORDS:

charliehebdo

france

hajiyakubquereshi

india

islam

jihad

paris

terror

terrorist

Islam in India...



To: Jan_Sobieski

When is enough enough?



To: Jan_Sobieski

(~$8,000,000,000) That would be eight billion dollars



To: Jan_Sobieski





by 4 posted onby BenLurkin (This is not a statement of fact. It is either opinion or satire; or both.)

To: cld51860

We live in bizarro world. I honestly believe that majority populations (read: whites) have been conditioned to believe they are racist xenophobes and should allow this crap to happen. Liberalism has destroyed this world. Prior to the 1900s, this crap wouldn’t be allowed to get as far as it has now.



by 5 posted onby rarestia (It's time to water the Tree of Liberty.)

To: Jan_Sobieski

I’m offering $.38 for Quereshi’s head in a KFC bucket. Thats twice what its worth.



by 6 posted onby muir_redwoods ("He is a very shallow critic who cannot see an eternal rebel in the heart of a conservative." G.K .C)

To: Jan_Sobieski

According to that leading Islamic scholar, El Presidente Jorge Boosh, “If you support a terorist, you are a terorist.” That Muslim who offered the reward should be killed at once. After all, that IS what we bought all those drones for.



by 7 posted onby GladesGuru (Islam Delenda Est. Because of what Islam is - and because of what Muslims do.)

To: Jan_Sobieski

Operation Wrath of God



To: muir_redwoods

Do you mean 19 cents is the recycle value of a KFC bucket?



by 9 posted onby Vigilanteman (Obama: Fake black man. Fake Messiah. Fake American. How many fakes can you fit in one Zer0?)

To: muir_redwoods

With the USDINR exchange rate being what it is, it’s not just chump change for the lucky guy who finds him. 1 USD = 63 1/5 INR



by 10 posted onby __rvx86 (A non-trivial fear: Government of my peers.)

To: GladesGuru

Haji Yakub Quereshi should be held accountable for supporting Islamic terrorists.



by 11 posted onby TheDon (The genocide in Iraq is the legacy of Barack Obama.)

To: cld51860

>> When is enough enough? In GOD’s time JESUS the King of Kings will lead His followers to victory against those who follow satan (a.k.a. “allah”). It is not for us to know exactly when that will be. But we do know the outcome.



by 12 posted onby Nervous Tick (There is no "allah" but satan, and mohammed is his demon.)

To: Jan_Sobieski

Haji supports the hadjis. Why am I not surprised...



by 13 posted onby Old Sarge (Its the Sixties all over again, but with crappy music...)

To: Jan_Sobieski

I’m sure there are plenty of Hindus who could take this guy out.



To: Jan_Sobieski

‘The whole world is in complete shock after the terrorist attack that struck Paris on Wednesday...’

Thats completely untrue. Only that part of the nonMuslim world run by liberals is shocked. The Muslims are celebrating and nonlibs are saying it was inevitable. Liberals OTOH can’t figure out how this happened given all the winking, looking the other way and rear end kissing they’ve engaged in w/ the Muslim world.



To: Zuben Elgenubi

Million...Billion...Trillion...Obama doesn’t care about the difference, so why should I? [sarc]



To: BenLurkin

LOL! Perfect!



by 17 posted onby Nervous Tick (There is no "allah" but satan, and mohammed is his demon.)

To: Jan_Sobieski

Horrible



To: Jan_Sobieski

He is Hindu, it said.



by 19 posted onby BunnySlippers (I LOVE BULL MARKETS . . .)

To: BunnySlippers

No...he is Muslim. Must be a typo of some sort...



Disclaimer: Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.

FreeRepublic , LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794

FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson