A Belgian terrorist cell was linked to threats of violence targeting newsagents selling the latest copy of Charlie Hebdo on Friday night, according to documents found in a flat where two terror suspects were killed.

The two men killed during a firefight with Belgium's special forces in Verviers on Thursday night have been named locally as Redouane Hagaoui and Tarik Jadaoun, who had recently returned from fighting in Syria.

Belgian secret service agents called in the armed police raid when intelligence indicated the terror cell was about to carry out an attack.

Following the raid, police found four Kalashnikov AK47 rifles, four handguns, ammunition and explosives. The terrorist cell was also equipped with police uniforms, radio, false documentation and an "important sum of cash".

Documents found in the house, 16 Rue de la Colline, Verviers also pointed to a terrorist attack on shops selling the current issue of Charlie Hebdo, depicting a weeping Prophet Mohammed and the slogan, "Tout est pardonné, French for "All is forgiven".

Earlier in the week, armed police units had been called out to protect newsagents following intelligence of a threat to target people selling or queuing to buy the magazine produced one week after Islamist terrorists attacked Charlie Hebdo's Paris office, killing 12 people.

Investigators believe the men were poised to carry out attacks while impersonating antiterrorist police officers, targeting either police stations, courts or shops and other public places.

"What is certain is that a major attack by this terrorist cell was imminent," said Eric Van der Sypt, the spokesman for Belgium's federal prosecutor.

Hagaoui, 23, also known as Abu Khalid Al Maghribi, had been under surveillance by Belgium's secret service after returning from fighting with radical Islamists in Syria.

He left his job as a cook to travel to Syria via Turkey last January after telling his parents he was going to visit relatives in their country of origin, Morocco.

The other man killed, Jadaoun, is thought to be of Chechen origin.

"The identification of the two suspects who were killed is in progress," said Mr Van der Sypt. "We have a very fair idea of who they are."

A third man wounded in the shoot-out has been named as Marouane E, 25. He has been charged with terrorist offences but denies all charges. Four other people were charged along with "Marouane E" him for "participating in the activities of a terrorist group".

Didier De Quévy, his lawyer, told police that his client has never been to Syria and claims to have been with the two dead suspects while a drugs deal was being transacted.

Verviers, a run down city near the German border, once renowned for its textiles and woollen industries, has a reputation as a hotbed of Islamist extremism.

In recent decades it has become home to foreign communities from Pakistan, Morocco, Afghanistan and Chechnya in search of cheap housing.

In 2008, the city was identified as a stronghold of the Muslim Brotherhood and Hamas.

The authorities estimate that 335 Belgians have gone to fight in Syria and Iraq in recent years, putting it top of the list of European nations exporting jihadi fighters in proportion to its small population of 11 million.

Two Belgians who were arrested in France after fleeing police raids against an Islamist cell in their home country, were headed towards Italy, police sources said.

They fled as Belgian police launched raids across the country leading to 13 arrests, mainly in Brussels and the two deaths in Verviers.

"We have arrested the people we wanted to arrest but I cannot confirm that we arrested everyone in this group," said Mr Van der Sypt. "This group was specific to Belgium."

Raids were also launched in France and Germany

In Germany it was reported that foreign intelligence agencies had intercepted discussions by Islamist militants about possible attacks on weekly marches organised by the country's new anti-Islamist movement, according to Der Spiegel magazine.

The report in this weekend's magazine said foreign intelligence services had picked up the content of communications by some "known international jihadists" which indicated they had discussed possible attacks on the rallies organised by the group, "Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the Occident" (Pegida).

"We take these leads very seriously," said an unnamed high-ranking security official.

Pegida marches began in the eastern city of Dresden with several hundred supporters three months ago and have steadily grown, to number 25,000 on Monday, five days after the attacks in Paris.

In Berlin, police arrested two men on Friday morning on suspicion of recruiting fighters for the Islamic State group in Syria.

French police arrested 12 people in the Paris region in relation to the attacks last week that claimed 17 lives.

A gunman who took two people hostage in a post office in Colombes, a suburb of northwest Paris, was arrested after giving himself up to police.

The hostages were released unharmed, according to police, in an incident which they said had no link to terrorism but added to the tension on the streets in the country.