Charlie Hebdo: Afghan Taliban condemns cartoons depicting prophet, hails Paris gunmen

Updated

The Afghan Taliban has lauded the deadly attack on the Charlie Hebdo magazine office and condemned the publication of cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed in France.

In an English statement, the group said it strongly condemned "this repugnant and inhumane action and consider its perpetrators, those who allowed it and its supporters [to be] the enemies of humanity".

The statement also said the gunmen who killed the magazine staff were carrying out justice.

The first edition of the magazine since the attack, which was released this week, featured the prophet depicted with a tear in his eye with the headline "All is Forgiven".

The Taliban, which ran a hardline Islamic government in Afghanistan from 1996-2001, said world leaders should prevent such cartoons from being released.

They said publication must be stopped to prevent "further harming world peace", adding that to do otherwise would mean "the beliefs and sacrosanctity of over a billion people is desecrated and the world is pushed further into the fire of hatred and war".

A few hundred people demonstrated last week in the central Afghan province of Uruzgan, praising the gunmen and criticising president Ashraf Ghani's condemnation of the attack in Paris.

Previous insults to Islam have sparked violent protests in the ultra-conservative Muslim country.

Four bookshops in Belgium sent 'warning letters'

The Qatar-based International Union of Muslim Scholars said it was "neither reasonable, nor logical" to publish cartoons "attacking" the prophet, while French Muslim leaders urged their communities to "stay calm and avoid emotive reactions".

Five million copies of the Charlie Hebdo issue will be printed, but the first print-run of 700,000 copies sold out quickly in Paris.

Demand for the latest Charlie Hebdo edition was high in partly French-speaking Belgium, with the 30,000 that were due to go on sale there expected to sell out quickly.

Four bookshops in the country received letters warning of reprisals if they chose to stock the controversial first issue.

Belgian prosecutors said they were taking the letters sent to the bookshops "very seriously" and were analysing video footage and making other inquiries to find whoever wrote them.

ABC/AFP

Topics: world-politics, terrorism, afghanistan

First posted