Charlie Hebdo shooting: Crowds gather for vigils in Melbourne, Sydney, Perth

Updated

Thousands of people have gathered in cities around Australia to remember the victims of the Charlie Hebdo shooting in Paris.

At Melbourne's Federation Square more than 1,000 people attended a vigil, which was organised by Maeva Siena, a member of the city's French community who knows a survivor of the attack.

Ms Siena, who has been in Australia for four months on a working holiday visa, said her friend worked at Charlie Hebdo and was at the Paris office when the gunmen struck.

"He is not dead... that's the best information we have. He's been injured and is in hospital for now," Ms Siena said.

Ms Siena said it was difficult being separated from her friends and family as she watched news of the attack come in on Wednesday night.

"It's very hard to be far away but I know he's not alone and all my family is in France so I just think about them," she said.

"We will be thinking of all the family of the dead men.

"Even if we are far away from our country, we need to show them we are with them, and we are all concerned by what has happened in France."

The men who carried out the shooting should not be linked to any community group, Ms Siena said.

"These people are mad, they are not representative of one community or one religion: we don't have to be scared of them, or of one religion."

Ms Siena said she hoped the vigil would be a demonstration of unity, support, love and the defence of freedom of speech.

"Everybody is welcome. I don't know who they are, or in what they believe, we just need to be together," she said.

"It doesn't matter what we think about religion or politics, we just have to be together."

Vigils also held in Sydney and Perth

Almost 2,000 French nationals in Sydney flocked to Martin Place, near to where the deadly Lindt cafe siege took place last month, and left candles for the 12 people killed in Paris.

There were emotional scenes as the names of the victims were read out followed by a minute's silence and the French national anthem.

France's ambassador to Australia Christophe Lecourtier told the large crowd: "We shall never surrender to terror and terrorism."

In Perth, more than 200 people gathered in the city's Forrest Place.

Honorary consul for France in Western Australia, Patrick Kedemos, said the feeling in the Australian French community was one of shock, but also solidarity and resolve.

"We are far away but our hearts today [are] with our families and friends in France," he said.

"For France the attacks were not only a terrorist attack but it's very much a targeted assassination, in the way we perceive it.

"It's an attack on the liberty of expression, journalists that were prominent in France, and at the same time it's an attack, or a perceived attack on our culture."

He said the gathering was a spontaneous, grass roots event.

French national Vanilla Jurrier said she came to stand in solidarity with friends in Paris.

"It's a big thing, which happened in France," she said.

"It was very important to be here ... just to show that it's very important for French people, even if we are not in France."

She said she was surprised by the number of people who had gathered in Paris as part of the "Je suis Charlie" (I am Charlie) movement.

"It is why I am here today," she said.

"Just because I wasn't there yesterday, with my friends in Paris."

Topics: emergency-incidents, terrorism, unrest-conflict-and-war, federation-square-3000, perth-6000, sydney-2000, melbourne-3000, france

First posted