A journalist who was in the Charlie Hebdo editorial meeting has described the moment when the terrorists opened fire.

Laurent Leger, 48, an investigations correspondent at the satirical weekly, told Le Parisien - where he previously worked - about Wednesday's meeting.

"It was the first news conference of the year," he said. "Everyone was on top form and happy. Some of them had just come back from holiday. It was almost euphoric. The year ahead was looking good for the magazine and we already had lots of projects in the pipeline."

The group, sitting around a circular table in the wooden-floored office, near the Bastille in central Paris, were involved in a lively debate about Michel Houellebecq's controversial novel, published that day, which featured a Muslim president of France.

Cabu, the cartoonist, "didn't hide his unhappiness" at the book, said Mr Leger. Philippe Lancon, the literary critic, disagreed and said it was a good read.

The conference was about to break up when they heard what they thought were firecrackers in the street below.

"We didn't pay any more attention than that," he said. "We were just happy to see each other again."

It was at that point that the door to the meeting room was thrown open.

"A man dressed in black with a uniform like that worn by police or gendarmes appeared just behind me," said Mr Leger, who was seated with his back to the door.

"I turned around. He was big, hefty, and had an assault weapon in his hands.

"We still thought it was a joke. The atmosphere was still joyous. But then we smelt the strong odour of gunpowder in the corridor, and we all realised that this wasn't a joke at all."

Mr Leger said the gunman opened fire immediately.

The journalist threw himself into the air, he said, and then crouched on the floor by a small table. He said he survived because the killer didn't notice him.

"I can't really describe what I saw," he said. "We lost such great talent. All the cartoonists fell in a fraction of a second.

"He didn't go all the way around the room, thankfully, because there was the meeting table in the middle. That's what undoubtably saved many lives."

The killer then went out into the corridor.

"I remember the silence after they left. A terrible silence. I was frozen beneath the table. Terrorised. It was unreal."

As the gunman left he passed a woman and said "we don't kill women" - which was not true, as Elsa Cayat was among the dead. And after the man left, Mr Leger said he heard once more "firecrackers" in the street.

He said the survivors picked themselves up, and tried to assist their colleagues - although some were beyond help.

"No one could believe it," he said. "No one could imagine that this would happen, in the heart of Paris."



The first photograph from inside the Charlie Hebdo offices following the attack (Ents Images)

And he said that he was determined that the magazine would continue.

"We will do everything possible to publish this week. But so many of them have died," he said, his voice trailing away.