The deadly terrorist attack on the offices of French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo shows the need to impose limits on freedom of the press, China’s official news agency argued on Sunday, as more than three million people marched in anti-terror rallies across France.

(Latest: Charlie Hebdo puts Muhammad on cover of post-attack issue).

“Charlie Hebdo had on multiple occasions been the target of protests and even revenge attacks on account of its controversial cartoons,” the Xinhua news agency commentary said, adding that the magazine had been criticized in the past for being “both crude and heartless” in its attacks on religion.

“What they seem not to realize is that world is diverse, and there should be limits on press freedom,” it continued.

The commentary, written by Xinhua Paris bureau chief Ying Qiang, appeared timed to coincide with Sunday’s rallies. The largest of those took place in Paris and attracted several world leaders, including Germany’s Angela Merkel and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.

The spree of violence ended on Friday after French police killed the three men suspected of murdering 17 people, including 11 inside the offices of Charlie Hebdo. The magazine was known for publishing vivid cartoons lampooning religion, including Islam, and had been targeted in the past by Muslims angry at its caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad.

China’s ambassador to France, Kong Quan, attended the rally, China’s Foreign Ministry said at a regular press briefing on Monday. “The content of the Xinhua commentary reflects Xinhua’s own point of view,” ministry spokesman Hong Lei said, adding that China opposed terrorism in all forms.

“Many religions and ethnic groups in this world have their own totems and spiritual taboos. Mutual respect is crucial for peaceful coexistence,” the commentary said. “Unfettered and unprincipled satire, humiliation and free speech are not acceptable.”

The Chinese news agency isn’t alone in raising questions about the tenor of Charlie Hebdo’s cartoons about Islam. Xinhua took note of this, quoting editorials in Western newspapers criticizing the French magazine’s approach and advocating greater respect for others’ religions and faiths. Still, none of the Western editorials it cited expressly advocated limiting freedom of speech.

Foreign and Chinese journalists held signs saying “I am Charlie” in French and Chinese on Thursday night at the Bookworm cafe and bookstore in Beijing. Wang Zhao/Agence France-Presse

The question of religious and cultural tolerance hits close to home for China, which is battling a surge of ethnic violence in Xinjiang, home to the mostly Muslim Uighurs. The northwestern territory’s regional government on Saturday approved a ban on face-covering veils put forward last month, and authorities have also cracked down on the wearing of long-beards – moves that some experts say are fueling resentment among Muslims.

“One important factor in this unending global conflict of the past few years is a paucity of tolerance, understanding and mutual respect,” the Xinhua commentary said. “If the two sides in a conflict can cease their posturing, stop thinking ‘those who are not like me must be devious,’ impose limits on themselves when spewing out their ‘freedom’ and show respect others, then this world will have one less tragedy to suffer.”

China’s government has grown increasingly skittish on the question of free speech since Chinese President Xi Jinping took office in late 2012. A journalists’ group photo expressing solidarity with Charlie Hebdo attracted the unexpected attention from police in Beijing last week.

[NOTE: This post has been updated since it was originally posted to reflect comment delivered Monday afternoon by China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs.]

– Josh Chin. Follow him on Twitter @joshchin